Omega V1 Governing Equations Design Document (#223)
E3SM-Project/Omega: components/omega/doc/design/OmegaV1GoverningEqns.md

### Omega will use TEOS10 for the equation of state.
See additional [EOS design document](EOS)

### Omega-1.0 will add new terms for the pressure gradient, vertical mixing, and vertical advection.
See forthcoming design documents on the pressure gradient, vertical mixing, and vertical advection.

## 3. Conservation Equations

### Control Volume Formulation

We begin with the continuous, control-volume form of the conservation equations. Consider an arbitrary control volume $V(t)$ with a bounding control surface $\partial V(t)$. The fluid has density $\rho({\bf x},t)$ and velocity ${\bf v}({\bf x},t)$. The control surface is moving at a velocity ${\bf v}_r({\bf x},t)$.  The vector ${\bf n}$ denotes the outward-facing unit normal vector on the control surface $\partial V(t)$, and is used in all surface integrals to represent the direction of fluxes across the boundary. The conservation equations are

> mass:

Reviewer: done

$$
\frac{d}{dt} \int_{V(t)} \rho({\bf x},t) \, dV
+ \int_{\partial V(t)}\rho({\bf x},t)\left({\bf v}({\bf x},t) - {\bf v}_r \right) \cdot {\bf n} \, dA
= 0
$$ (continuous-mass)

> tracers:

Reviewer: done

$$
\frac{d}{dt} \int_{V(t)} \rho({\bf x},t) \, \varphi({\bf x},t) \, dV
+ \int_{\partial V(t)}\rho({\bf x},t)\, \varphi({\bf x},t) \left({\bf v}({\bf x},t) - {\bf v}_r \right) \cdot {\bf n} \, dA
= 0
$$ (continuous-tracer)

> momentum:

Reviewer: done

- Vertical transport of mass, tracers, and momentum will use $\tilde{w}$ rather than volume flux $w$.

[Griffies 2018](https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctv301gzg) p. 37  argues for the use of pseudo-velocities, which he calls the density-weighted velocity, for non-Boussinesq models.
Griffies recommends a value of $\rho_0=1035$ kg/m$^3$, following p. 47 of [Gill (1982)](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0074-6142(08)60028-5), because ocean density varies less than 2% from that value.

The use of a constant $\rho_0$ in defining pseudo-height does not imply the Boussinesq approximation. In Boussinesq models, $\rho$ is set to $\rho_0$ everywhere except in the buoyancy term (i.e., the vertical pressure gradient or gravitational forcing). Here, by contrast, we retain the full $\rho$ in all terms, and use $\rho_0$ only as a normalization constant—for example, so that $d\tilde{z} \approx dz$ when $\rho \approx \rho_0$. This preserves full mass conservation while making vertical units more intuitive.

This approach ensures consistency with mass conservation and simplifies vertical discretization.

> > **Note:** This definition does not invoke the Boussinesq approximation. The full, time- and space-dependent density $\rho(x, y, z, t)$ is retained in all conservation laws. The use of $\rho_0$ is solely for normalization.

Reviewer: But I don't feel strongly in that feeling, if others prefer to remove this, I will.

+ \int_{\partial V^{\text{bot}}(t)} \rho \varphi ({\bf v} - {\bf v}_r) \cdot {\bf n} \, dA
= 0
$$ (tr-vh-split-pseudo)

We now express the top and bottom surfaces using the pseudo-height variable $\tilde{z}(x,y,t)$ rather than geometric height $z$. The unit normals are therefore:

$$
{\bf n}^{\text{top}} \approx (-\nabla \tilde{z}^{\text{top}}, 1), \quad
{\bf n}^{\text{bot}} \approx (-\nabla \tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}, 1)
$$ (top-bot-normal-pseudo)

Here we apply a small-slope approximation, assuming $|\nabla \tilde{z}| \ll 1$, and omit normalization factors for clarity. This approximation retains leading-order effects of slope while simplifying the surface geometry.

To facilitate integration over a fixed horizontal domain, we introduce the following notation:
- $A$ is the horizontal footprint (in the $x$–$y$ plane) of the control volume $V(t)$.
- $dA$ is the horizontal area element.
- $\partial A$ is the boundary of $A$, and $dl$ is the line element along this boundary.
- ${\bf n}_\perp$ is the outward-pointing unit normal vector in the horizontal plane, defined on $\partial A$. It lies in the $x$–$y$ plane and is orthogonal to $dl$.

> We now project the tracer equation [](#tr-vh-split-pseudo) onto a horizontal domain $A$ (the footprint of the control volume), over which the top and bottom boundaries vary in height. The side walls remain fixed in time and space.

Reviewer: I like that better.  Changed

$$
\frac{d}{dt} \int_{A} \int_{\tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}}^{\tilde{z}^{\text{top}}} \, {\bf u} \, d\tilde{z} \, dA
&+
\int_{\partial A} \left( \int_{\tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}}^{\tilde{z}^{\text{top}}} \, {\bf u} \otimes {\bf u} \, d\tilde{z} \right) \cdot {\bf n}_\perp \, dl \\
&+
\int_A \rho_0 \, {\bf u} \left[ \tilde{w}_{tr} - \tilde{ u} \right]_{\tilde{z} = \tilde{z}^{\text{top}}} \, dA
-
\int_A \rho_0 \, {\bf u} \left[ \tilde{w}_{tr} - \tilde{ u} \right]_{\tilde{z} = \tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}} \, dA \\
&=
\int_A \int_{\tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}}^{\tilde{z}^{\text{top}}} {\bf b}_{\perp} \, d\tilde{z} \, dA
+
\int_{\partial A} \left( \int_{\tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}}^{\tilde{z}^{\text{top}}} \frac{{\bf \tau}}{\rho} \, d\tilde{z} \right) dl \\
&\quad
+ \int_A \left[ \frac{{\bf \tau}}{\rho} \right]_{\tilde{z} = \tilde{z}^{\text{top}}} \, dA
- \int_A \left[ \frac{{\bf \tau}}{\rho} \right]_{\tilde{z} = \tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}} \, dA
$$ (vh-momentum-pseudo)

These equations express horizontal and vertical fluxes naturally in terms of pseudo-height, enabling fully consistent discretization in the vertical coordinate used for prognostic evolution.

## 7. Vertical Discretization for the Layered Equations

> The previous equation set [](#vh-mass-pseudo) to [](#vh-momentum-pseudo) is for an arbitrary layer bounded by $z^{\text{top}}$ above and $z^{\text{bot}}$ below. We now provide the details of the vertical discretization. The ocean is divided vertically into $K_{max}$ layers, with $k=0$ at the top and increasing downwards (opposite from $z$). Layer $k$ is bounded between $z_k^{\text{top}}$ above and $z_{k+1}^{\text{top}}$ below (i.e. $z_k^{\text{bot}} = z_{k+1}^{\text{top}}$).

Reviewer: fixed

The mass equation is identical to the tracer equation with $\varphi=1$.

**Mass:**

$$
\frac{\partial {\tilde h}_k }{\partial t}
+ \nabla \cdot \left({\tilde h}_k \overline{\left<{\bf u}\right>}^{\tilde{z}}_k\right)
+ \rho_0 \left[ \left<{\tilde w}_{tr}\right> - \left<\tilde{ u}\right> \right]_{{\tilde z}={\tilde z}_k^{\text{top}}}
- \rho_0 \left[ \left<{\tilde w}_{tr}\right> - \left<\tilde{ u}\right> \right]_{{\tilde z}={\tilde z}_{k+1}^{\text{bot}}}
= 0.
$$ (layer-mass)

### Momentum

> We now derive the horizontal momentum equation in our non-Boussinesq, hydrostatic framework, following the same finite-volume approach used for mass and tracer conservation. We work with a pseudo-height vertical coordinate $\tilde{z}$ as defined in [Pseudo-Height Coordinate Section](pseudo-height).

Reviewer: removed

$$ (discrete-momentum)

**Diagnostic Relations:**

 $$
 p_{i,k} = p_{i}^{surf} + g\rho_0 \sum_{k'=1}^{k-1} \tilde{h}_{i,k'} + \frac{1}{2} g\rho_0 \tilde{h}_{i,k}
 $$ (discrete-pressure)

$$
\alpha_{i,k} = f_{eos}(p_{i,k},\Theta_{i,k},S_{i,k})
$$ (discrete-eos)

$$
z_{i,k}^{top} = z_{i}^{floor} + \sum_{k'=k}^{K_{max}} \alpha_{i,k'}h_{i,k'}
$$ (discrete-z)

We refer to these as the discrete equations, but time derivatives remain continuous. The time discretization is described in the [time stepping design document](TimeStepping.md). The velocity, mass-thickness, and tracers are solved prognostically using [](discrete-momentum), [](discrete-mass), [](discrete-tracer). At the new time, these variables are used to compute pressure [](discrete-pressure), specific volume [](discrete-eos), and z-locations [](discrete-z). Additional variables are computed diagnostically at the new time: $\mathbf{u}^{\perp}$, $K$, $\zeta_a$, $z^{mid}$, $\Phi$, etc. The initial geopotential is simply $\Phi=gz$, but additional gravitational terms may be added later.

> The horizontal operators $\nabla$, $\nabla\cdot$, and $\nabla \times$ are now in their discrete form. In the TRiSK design, gradients ($\nabla$) map cell centers to edges; divergence ($\nabla \cdot$) maps edge quantities to cells; and curl ($\nabla \times$) maps edges to vertices. The exact form of operators and interpolation stencils remain the same as those given in [Omega-0 design document](OmegaV0ShallowWater.md#Operator Formulation). The discrete version of terms common with Omega-0, such as advection, potential vorticity, and $\nabla K$, can be found in [Omega-0 Momentum Terms](OmegaV0ShallowWater.md#Momentum Terms) and [Omega-0 Thickness and Tracer Terms](OmegaV0ShallowWater.md#Thickness and Tracer Terms).

Reviewer: fixed

## 11. Sub gridscale parameterizations

### Horizontal Momentum Dissipation

> There are two terms related to horizontal momentum dissipation in [](#discrete-momentum) that need to be parameterized, $\left<\mathbf{u}^\prime \tilde{u}^\prime \right>$ and $\frac{1}{\left[\tilde{h}_{i,k}\right]_e} \nabla \cdot \left( \tilde{h}_k \left< {\bf u}^\prime \otimes {\bf u}^\prime \right>_k \right)$.  The former only arises from the layer integration in psuedo-height coordinates, we interpret this term as the projection of the horizontal momentum dissipation that crosses $\tilde{z}$ interfaces.  Given this, we discuss the form of the horizontal dissipation parameterization first and return to the second term in a later subsection.

Reviewer: fixed

#### Vertical momentum dissipation
The vertical turbulent momentum stress is most commonly parameterized as a down-gradient process, i.e.

$$
\left[ \left<\mathbf{u}^\prime \tilde{w}_{tr}^\prime \right> \right]_{e,k} = -\frac{\nu_v \rho}{\rho_0} \left[\frac{\partial u}{\partial \tilde{z}}\right]_{e,k}
$$

Plugging this relation into the last part of [](#discrete-momentum)

$$
\frac{1}{\left[\tilde{h}_{i,k}\right]_{e,k}}  \left\{ \left[ \nu_v \left[\frac{\partial u}{\partial \tilde{z}}\right]_{e,k} \right]_{e,k} - \left[ \nu_v \left[\frac{\partial u}{\partial \tilde{z}}\right]_{e,k} \right]_{e,k+1}  \right\}
$$ (discrete-mom-vert-diff)

##### Vertical derivatives in a finte volume framework

Omega will predict layer average quantities (e.g., $u_k$) as such it's not immediately cleear that a traditional discretization is appropriate as there is a discontinuity in the predicted variables at the layer edge.  To circumvent this problem, we turn to weak derivatives instead of traditional pointwise forms.  A weak derivative of $\phi$ is defined as

> $$

Reviewer: Yes. fixed

$$
- Ra \, u_{e,k}
$$ (discrete-mom-Ra)

#### Temperature, salinity, and freshwater forcing

Direct forcing of temperature, e.g. from latent or sensible heat fluxes take a form similar to MPAS-Ocean

$$
\frac{LHF}{C_p \rho_1}
$$

where $\rho_1$ is the density in the top layer of Omega. This gives units of $mK/s$.

#### Freshwater forcing

Since Omega is a non-Boussinesq ocean, surface sources of water will be mass fluxes instead of being converted into thickness fluxes.  Similar to MPAS-Oceran, Omega will include an ability to spread certain fluxes (e.g., river runoff) over a depth specified in the YAML configuration file.

### Horizontal Tracer Diffusion

As with momentum dissipation, the horizontal tracer diffusion arises from the $\left<\mathbf{u}_k^\prime \varphi_k \right>$ and $\left< \tilde{u}^\prime \varphi^\prime \right>$.  As in MPAS-Ocean, the former term can be parameterized either as Laplacian or Biharmonic diffusion,

$$
D^\varphi_{i,k} =  \kappa_2 \nabla^2 \varphi_{i,k} - \kappa_4 \nabla^4 \varphi_{i,k}.
$$ (discrete-tracer-diff)

#### Laplacian diffusion (del2)
The Laplacian may be written as the divergence of the gradient,

$$

> \nabla \cdot \left(\tilde{h}_k \left<\varphi^\prime u^\prime \right>_k \right) = \nabla \cdot \left( \tilde{h}_{i,k} \kappa_{2,e,k} \nabla \varphi_{i,k} \right).

Reviewer: I think in the derivation we treat kappa as constant, but in practice for variable mesh resolution it's not given it scales with the mesh.  So I'm not sure what to treat this as in the doc.  What do you think @hyungyukang ?

> \nabla \cdot \left(\tilde{h}_k \left<\varphi^\prime u^\prime \right>_k \right) = \nabla \cdot \left( \tilde{h}_{i,k} \kappa_{2,e,k} \nabla \varphi_{i,k} \right).

Reviewer: addressed

$$ (discrete-tracer-del2)

> See [Omega V0 Section 3.3.2](OmegaV0ShallowWater.md#Del2 tracer diffusion) for details of this calculation.

Reviewer: fixed

#### Biharmonic diffusion (del4)
The biharmonic is a Laplacian operator applied twice,

$$
 -  \nabla \cdot \left( \kappa_{4,e,k} \nabla
\right[
\nabla \cdot \left( \tilde{h}_{i,k} \nabla \varphi_{i,k} \right)
\left]
 \right).
$$ (discrete-tracer-del4)

Each of these operators are written as horizontal stencils in the [Omega V0 Operator Formulation Section](OmegaV0ShallowWater.md#Operator Formulation).  Again we note that the variables in these equations are the layer average.

#### Horizontal tracer diffusion across a sloping surface
As with horizontal momentum dissipation, there is a turbulent flux of tracer across a sloping $\tilde{z}$ interface.  We interpret the $\left< \tilde{z}^\prime \varphi^\prime \right>$ as the projection of the horizontal turbulent flux across the sloping interface.  The form of the diffusion is similar, taking Laplacian diffusion as an example

$$

>  \nabla \cdot \left( \tilde{h}_{i} \kappa_{2,e} \nabla \varphi_{i} \right)_k.

Reviewer: fixed

#### Vertical tracer diffusion
The vertical tracer diffusion arises from the $\rho_0\left(\left[\left<\varphi^\prime \tilde{w}_{tr}^\prime \right> \right]_k - \left[\left<\varphi^\prime \tilde{w}_{tr}^\prime \right> \right]_{k+1} \right)$ term.  In an equation for $\tilde{h}_k \varphi$, this term is different than in the velocity equation for vertical turbulent diffusion.  In Omega, we will follow the same approach as in MPAS-Ocean and solve the tracer diffusion after the main tracer update.  Roughly Omega will compute a temporarily updated tracer as

$$
\varphi^{new} = \tilde{h}_k^{old} \varphi^{old} + dt \frac{Adv + Hdiff}{\tilde{h}_k^{new}}.
$$

The non mass weighted tracer is then used to compute the diffusive tendency and compute the final tracer at the next timestep.  Given diffusion is done on the non mass weighted tracer, the diffusive term is written as

$$
\frac{rho_0}{\tilde{h}_k} \left\{\left[<\varphi^\prime \tilde{w}_{tr}^\prime \right>\right]_k - \left[<\varphi^\prime \tilde{w}_{tr}^\prime \right>\right]_{k+1} \right\}

> $$

Reviewer: fixed

#### Biharmonic diffusion (del4)
The biharmonic is a Laplacian operator applied twice,

$$
 -  \nabla \cdot \left( \kappa_{4,e} \nabla
\right[
\nabla \cdot \left( \tilde{h}_{i,k} \nabla \varphi_{i,k} \right)
\left]
 \right).
$$ (discrete-tracer-del4)

Each of these operators are written as horizontal stencils in the {ref}`Omega V0 Operator Formulation Section <32-operator-formulation>`.  Again we note that the variables in these equations are the layer average.

#### Horizontal tracer diffusion across a sloping surface
As with horizontal momentum dissipation, there is a turbulent flux of tracer across a sloping $\tilde{z}$ interface.  We interpret the $\left< \tilde{z}^\prime \varphi^\prime \right>$ as the projection of the horizontal turbulent flux across the sloping interface.  The form of the diffusion is similar, taking Laplacian diffusion as an example

$$
 \nabla \cdot \left( \tilde{h}_{i} \kappa_{2,e} \nabla \varphi_{i} \right)_k.
$$

While this is similar in form, this uses the reconstruction at the top of the layer and not the layer averages directly as in [](#discrete-tracer-del2).

> #### Vertical tracer diffusion

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Vertical tracer diffusion
```

> The vertical tracer diffusion arises from the $\rho_0\left(\left[\left<\varphi^\prime \tilde{w}_{tr}^\prime \right> \right]_k - \left[\left<\varphi^\prime \tilde{w}_{tr}^\prime \right> \right]_{k+1} \right)$ term.  In an equation for $\tilde{h}_k \varphi$, this term is different than in the velocity equation for vertical turbulent diffusion.  In Omega, we will follow the same approach as in MPAS-Ocean and solve the tracer diffusion after the main tracer update.  Roughly Omega will compute a temporarily updated tracer as
> 
> $$
> \varphi^{new} = \tilde{h}_k^{old} \varphi^{old} + dt \frac{Adv + Hdiff}{\tilde{h}_k^{new}}.
> $$
> 
> The non mass weighted tracer is then used to compute the diffusive tendency and compute the final tracer at the next timestep.  Given diffusion is done on the non mass weighted tracer, the diffusive term is written as
> 
> $$
> \frac{rho_0}{\tilde{h}_k} \left\{\left[\left<\varphi^\prime \tilde{w}_{tr}^\prime \right>\right]_k - \left[\left<\varphi^\prime \tilde{w}_{tr}^\prime \right>\right]_{k+1} \right\}
> $$
> 
> Taking a traditional down gradient approximation and using [](#weak-deriv-final) the vertical turbulent flux can be applied using a tridiagonal solver in the
> [tridiagonal solver](TridiagonalSolver) in the implicit vertical mixing step.  Additional enhancements, such as non local tracer fluxes will be discused in future design documents.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The vertical tracer diffusion arises from the $\rho_0\left(\left[\left<\varphi^\prime \tilde{w}_{tr}^\prime \right> \right]_k - \left[\left<\varphi^\prime \tilde{w}_{tr}^\prime \right> \right]_{k+1} \right)$ term. A treatment of this term differs from the vertical momentum diffusion. In the tracer equation, the quantity being updated is the mass-weighted tracer $\tilde{h}_k \varphi$, while in the momentum equation, the variable is simply the velocity $\bf u$, without multiplication by pseudo-thickness $\tilde{h}_k$. This difference affects how vertical mixing is handled. For the momentum equation, the vertical mixing term includes an explicit $1/\tilde{h}_k$ factor, which makes it easy to rearrange the equation into a standard tridiganal form that can be solved implicitly. However, in the tracer equation [](#layer-tracer-final-simple), because $\tilde{h}_k$ is already included in the prognostic variable $\tilde{h}_k \varphi_k$, isolating $\varphi_k^{n+1}$ becomes more difficult, where $n$ is an index of timestep. In particular, if $\tilde{h}_k^{n+1}$ were treated implicitly, the left-hand side of [](#layer-tracer-final-simple) would involve the product of two unknowns $\tilde{h}_k^{n+1}$ and $\varphi_k^{n+1}$, resulting in a non-linear system. This nonlinearity prevents the formation of the standard tridiagonal matrix for $\varphi_k^{n+1}$, unlike in the vertical momentum diffusion. To address this, Omega follows the approach used in the MPAS-Ocean: the tracer update is split into two steps. First, a provisional tracer field is computed using advection and horizontal diffusion only, excluding vertical mixing. Then, vertical tracer diffusion is applied in a separate implicit step using this provisional field.

During the tracer update, Omega first computes a provisional tracer field that excludes vertical turbulent mixing to obtain $\varphi^{n+1}$. This temporary tracer update is given by

$$
\varphi^{*} = \frac{\tilde{h}_k^{n} \varphi^{n} + \Delta t  (\text{Adv} + \text{Diff}_{\text{H}})}{\tilde{h}_k^{n+1}}.
$$ (provision-tracer-update)

where the term "$\text{Adv}$" represents resolved tracer advection and includes both horizontal transport and resolved vertical transport by the projected vertical velocity $\tilde{W}_{tr}$, and the "$\text{Diff}_{\text{H}}$" term represents horizontal tracer diffusion including the harmonic and biharmonic diffusion.
Once the provisional tracer field is formed, vertical diffusion is applied using an implicit tridiagonal solver. The non mass weighted tracer is used to compute the diffusive tendency and compute the final tracer at the next timestep. Given diffusion is done on the non mass weighted tracer, the diffusive term is written as

$$
\frac{\rho_0}{\tilde{h}_k} \left\{\left[\left<\varphi^\prime \tilde{w}_{tr}^\prime \right>\right]_k - \left[\left<\varphi^\prime \tilde{w}_{tr}^\prime \right>\right]_{k+1} \right\}
$$

Taking a traditional down gradient approximation and using [](#weak-deriv-final) the vertical turbulent flux can be applied using a tridiagonal solver ($\mathcal{L}$) in the
[tridiagonal solver](TridiagonalSolver) in the implicit vertical mixing step:
$$
\varphi^{n+1}=\mathcal{L}_\varphi^{-1} (\varphi^*)
$$
Additional enhancements, such as non local tracer fluxes will be discussed in future design documents.

```

I tried to improve this section to clarify. @vanroekel , please review this and feel free to modify.

The model also assumes hydrostatic balance in the vertical momentum equation, which is a standard and well-justified simplification for large-scale geophysical flows. In such regimes, vertical accelerations are typically small compared to the vertical pressure gradient and gravitational forces. This assumption simplifies the dynamics and removes most sound waves while retaining fidelity for the mesoscale to planetary-scale ocean circulation that Omega is designed to simulate.

### Omega will use TEOS10 for the equation of state.
See additional [EOS design document](EOS)

### Omega-1.0 will add new terms for the pressure gradient, vertical mixing, and vertical advection.
See forthcoming design documents on the pressure gradient, [vertical mixing](VerticalMixingCoeff), and vertical advection.

## 3. Conservation Equations

### Control Volume Formulation

> We begin with the continuous, control-volume form of the conservation equations. Consider an arbitrary control volume $V(t)$ with a bounding control surface $\partial V(t)$. The fluid has density $\rho({\bf x},t)$ and velocity ${\bf v}({\bf x},t)$. The control surface is moving at a velocity ${\bf v}_r({\bf x},t)$.  The vector ${\bf n}$ denotes the outward-facing unit normal vector on the control surface $\partial V(t)$, and is used in all surface integrals to represent the direction of fluxes across the boundary. The conservation equations are

Reviewer 3: minor: x is not defined.

+ \int_{\partial V(t)} {\bf \tau}({\bf n},{\bf x},t)  \, dA
$$ (continuous-momentum)

The operator $\frac{d}{dt}$ used here denotes the rate of change within a moving control volume, sometimes referred to as a Reynolds transport derivative. It differs from the partial derivative $\frac{\partial}{\partial t}$, which represents the local rate of change at a fixed point in space (Eulerian frame), and from the material derivative $\frac{D}{Dt}$, which follows an individual fluid parcel (Lagrangian frame). The use of $\frac{d}{dt}$ allows for conservation laws to be expressed in a general framework that includes both stationary and moving control volumes, consistent with the Reynolds transport theorem.

These equations are taken from [Kundu et al. 2016](https://doi.org/10.1016/C2012-0-00611-4) (4.5) for mass conservation and (4.17) for momentum conservation.
All notation is identical to Kundu, except that we use ${\bf v}$ for the three-dimensional velocity (${\bf u}$ will be used below for horizontal velocities) and ${\bf v}_r$ and $\partial V$ match the notation in [Ringler et al. 2013](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1463500313000760) Appendix A.2.

> The tracer equation is simply mass conservation, where the conserved quantity is the tracer mass $\rho \varphi$, as $\varphi$ is the tracer concentration per unit mass.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The tracer equation is simply mass conservation, where the conserved quantity is the tracer mass in the volume $\rho \varphi$, as $\varphi$ is the tracer concentration per unit mass.
```

We now project the tracer equation [](#tr-vh-split-pseudo) onto a horizontal domain $A$ (the footprint of the control volume), over which the top and bottom boundaries vary in height. The side walls remain fixed in time and space, but not vertical extent.

The pseudo-height surfaces $\tilde{z}^{\text{top}}(x,y,t)$ and $\tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}(x,y,t)$ are not fixed in time, so their motion must be accounted for when computing vertical fluxes. We define $\tilde{w}_r$ as the pseudo-height velocity of the interface:

$$
\tilde{w}_{r} = \left.\frac{d\tilde{z}}{dt}\right |_{\text interface}
$$ (interface-velocity)

The **net vertical transport** through a moving surface is then

$$
\tilde{w}_{tr} = \tilde{w} - \tilde{w}_r
$$ (w-tilde-tr)

This gives the relative pseudo-mass flux through the interface per unit reference density. Vertical flux terms are written using this difference to ensure conservation in the presence of interface motion.

In the flux integrals below, we express all surface-normal transport using $\tilde{w}_{tr}$, i.e.,

$$
\rho_0 \varphi \left[ \tilde{w}_{tr} - \tilde{ u} \right]
= \rho_0 \varphi \left[ \tilde{w} - \tilde{w}_r - \tilde{ u} \right]
$$ (vertical-flux)

> so that the vertical flux terms correctly account for both the local motion of the fluid and the motion of the interface itself. Because both terms are scaled by $1/\rho_0$, the full flux is multiplied by $\rho_0$ to recover a physical mass flux. This ensures dimensional consistency and physical equivalence to the traditional form $\rho w - \rho {\bf u} \cdot \nabla z$ expressed in geometric-height coordinates.
> 
> The quantity $\tilde{w}$ from equation [](#w-tilde) is the pseudo-velocity. The second term, $\tilde{ u} = {\bf u} \cdot \nabla \tilde{z}^{\text{top}}$, captures the component of horizontal velocity advecting material across a sloping pseudo-height interface. Together, the expression in brackets represents the **net vertical transport** through a surface of constant $\tilde{z}$. A schematic of how $\tilde{w}$, $\tilde{w}_{tr}$, and $\tilde{u}$ relate to each other: 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
so that the vertical flux terms correctly account for both the local motion of the fluid and the motion of the interface itself. Because both terms are scaled by $1/\rho_0$, the full flux is multiplied by $\rho_0$ to recover a physical mass flux. This ensures dimensional consistency and physical equivalence to the traditional form $\rho w - \rho {\bf u} \cdot \nabla z$ expressed in geometric-height coordinates.

The quantity $\tilde{w}$ is the pseudo-velocity defined in equation [](#w-tilde) . The second term, $\tilde{ u} = {\bf u} \cdot \nabla \tilde{z}^{\text{top}}$, captures the component of horizontal velocity advecting material across a sloping pseudo-height interface. Together, the expression in brackets represents the **net vertical transport** through a surface of constant $\tilde{z}$. A schematic of how $\tilde{w}$, $\tilde{w}_{tr}$, and $\tilde{u}$ relate to each other: 
```

& + \int_A \rho_0 \varphi \left[ \tilde{w}_{tr} - \tilde{ u} \right]_{\tilde{z} = \tilde{z}^{\text{top}}} dA \\
& - \int_A \rho_0 \varphi \left[ \tilde{w}_{tr} - \tilde{ u} \right]_{\tilde{z} = \tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}} dA
= 0
$$ (tr-vh-separation-pseudo)

This equation is structurally identical to its $z$-based counterpart but with all references to geometric height replaced by pseudo-height quantities.

This formulation allows vertical mass and tracer transport to be computed directly in terms of prognostic variables, without reconstructing $\rho$ or $z$ explicitly.

Similar expressions to [](#tr-vh-separation-pseudo) hold for mass and momentum:

**Mass:**

$$
\frac{d}{dt} \int_A \int_{\tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}}^{\tilde{z}^{\text{top}}} \, d\tilde{z} \, dA
& + \int_{\partial A} \left( \int_{\tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}}^{\tilde{z}^{\text{top}}} \, {\bf u} \, d\tilde{z} \right) \cdot {\bf n}_\perp \, dl \\
& + \int_A \rho_0 \left[ \tilde{w}_{tr} - \tilde{ u} \right] dA \\
& - \int_A \rho_0 \left[ \tilde{w}_{tr} - \tilde{ u} \right] dA
= 0
$$ (vh-mass-pseudo)

**Tracer:**

$$
\frac{d}{dt} \int_A \int_{\tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}}^{\tilde{z}_k^{\text{top}}}  \varphi \, d\tilde{z} \, dA

> & + \int_{\partial A} \left( \int_{\tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}}^{\tilde{z}_k^{\text{top}}}  \varphi \, {\bf u} \, d\tilde{z} \right) \cdot {\bf n}_\perp \, dl & \\

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
& + \int_{\partial A} \left( \int_{\tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}}^{\tilde{z}^{\text{top}}}  \varphi \, {\bf u} \, d\tilde{z} \right) \cdot {\bf n}_\perp \, dl & \\
```

& + \int_A \left\{ \rho_0 \varphi \left[\tilde{w}_{tr} - \tilde{ u} \right] \right\}_{\tilde{z} = \tilde{z}^{\text{top}}} \, dA & \\
& - \int_A \left\{ \rho_0 \varphi \left[\tilde{w}_{tr} - \tilde{ u} \right] \right\}_{\tilde{z} = \tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}}\, dA
& = 0
$$ (vh-tracer-pseudo)

**Momentum:**

$$
\frac{d}{dt} \int_{A} \int_{\tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}}^{\tilde{z}^{\text{top}}} \, {\bf u} \, d\tilde{z} \, dA
&+
\int_{\partial A} \left( \int_{\tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}}^{\tilde{z}^{\text{top}}} \, {\bf u} \otimes {\bf u} \, d\tilde{z} \right) \cdot {\bf n}_\perp \, dl \\
&+
\int_A \rho_0 \, {\bf u} \left[ \tilde{w}_{tr} - \tilde{ u} \right]_{\tilde{z} = \tilde{z}^{\text{top}}} \, dA
-
\int_A \rho_0 \, {\bf u} \left[ \tilde{w}_{tr} - \tilde{ u} \right]_{\tilde{z} = \tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}} \, dA \\
&=

> \int_A \int_{\tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}}^{\tilde{z}^{\text{top}}} {\bf b}_{\perp} \, d\tilde{z} \, dA

Reviewer 3: I don't see the definition of {\bf b}_{\perp}. Let's add it below for clarity, given that I suppose it is normal to A, not \cdot {\bf n}_\perp

Reviewer: added

$$ (vh-momentum-pseudo)

These equations express horizontal and vertical fluxes naturally in terms of pseudo-height, enabling fully consistent discretization in the vertical coordinate used for prognostic evolution.

## 7. Vertical Discretization for the Layered Equations

The previous equation set [](#vh-mass-pseudo) to [](#vh-momentum-pseudo) is for an arbitrary layer bounded by $\tilde{z}^{\text{top}}$ above and $\tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}$ below. We now provide the details of the vertical discretization. The ocean is divided vertically into $K_{max}$ layers, with $k=0$ at the top and increasing downwards (opposite from $z$). Layer $k$ is bounded between $\tilde{z}_k^{\text{top}}$ above and $\tilde{z}_{k+1}^{\text{top}}$ below (i.e. $\tilde{z}_k^{\text{bot}} = \tilde{z}_{k+1}^{\text{top}}$).

The layer thickness of layer $k$, used in MPAS-Ocean, is

$$
h_k = \int_{z_{k+1}^{\text{top}}}^{z_k^{\text{top}}} dz.
$$ (def-thickness)

In Omega we will use the pseudo-thickness,

$$
{\tilde h}_k(x,y,t)
&= \int_{{\tilde z}_{k+1}^{\text{top}}}^{{\tilde z}_k^{\text{top}}} d\tilde{z} \\
&= \frac{1}{\rho_0} \int_{z_{k+1}^{\text{top}}}^{z_k^{\text{top}}} \rho \, dz \\

> &= \frac{1}{\rho_0 g} \left( \hat{p}_{k+1}^{\text{top}} - \hat{p}_k^{\text{top}} \right)

Reviewer 3: Why are we using/introducing $\hat{p}$ here? Isn't it $p$ as used in the equations above?

     =
\frac{\int_{{\tilde z}_{k+1}^{\text{top}}}^{{\tilde z}_k^{\text{top}}} \varphi d{\tilde z}}
     {\int_{{\tilde z}_{k+1}^{\text{top}}}^{{\tilde z}_k^{\text{top}}} d{\tilde z}}
=
\frac{1}{{\tilde h}_k}\int_{{\tilde z}_{k+1}^{\text{top}}}^{{\tilde z}_k^{\text{top}}} \varphi d{\tilde z}.
$$ (def-layer-average)

Rearranging, it is useful to note that

$$
\int_{\tilde{z}_{k+1}^{\text{top}}}^{\tilde{z}_k^{\text{top}}} \varphi d\tilde{z}
 = {\tilde h}_k {\overline \varphi}^{\tilde{z}}_k(x,y,t).
$$ (h-phi)

This relation is frequently used in discretized fluxes and conservation equations to replace integrals with layer-mean quantities.

## 8. Decomposition and Averaging

### Decomposition

In this document, two decompositions will be critical.  The first decomposition is

$$
\varphi = \overline{\varphi}^{\tilde{z}}_k + \delta \varphi
$$ (vertical-decomposition)

which is a density weighted vertical integral based upon [](#def-layer-average) and the deviation from this value.

The second decomposition is

$$
\varphi = \left<\varphi\right> + \varphi^\prime
$$ (reynolds-definition)

which is the traditional Reynolds' average and deviation from this value.

> The fundamental ocean model equations are most often Reynolds' averaged to derive the sub gridscale stresses. Each variable is decomposed into an average and a fluctuating component [[](#reynolds-definition)]. The averaging operator is defined such that it can be passed through derivatives and integrals without corrections and an average of products with a single perturbation quantity is zero.

Reviewer 3: Are we leaving the averaging operator general on purpose or can we specify the averaging variable early on for clarity? the implication here is spatial scale (e.g. subgrid scales) but the time-mean Reynolds averaging is as, if not more, common.

$$
\overline{\left<\varphi\right>}^{\tilde{z}}_k(x,y,t) =
\frac{1}{\tilde{h}_k} \int_{\tilde{z}_{k+1}^{\text{top}}}^{\tilde{z}_k^{\text{top}}} \left<\varphi\right> d\tilde{z}.
$$ (def-layer-average-reynolds)

Additionally, for the decomposition related to vertical averaging, we will encounter terms such as ${\overline \varphi}^{\tilde{z}}_k \delta\varphi$ that need to be vertical averaged.  Using [](#def-layer-average) we have

$$
\overline{{\overline \varphi}^{\tilde{z}}_k \delta\varphi}^{\tilde{z}}_k &= \frac{\int_{{\tilde z}_{k+1}^{\text{top}}}^{{\tilde z}_k^{\text{top}}} {\overline \varphi}^{\tilde{z}}_k \delta \varphi d{\tilde z}}
     {\int_{{\tilde z}_{k+1}^{\text{top}}}^{{\tilde z}_k^{\text{top}}} d{\tilde z}} \\
     &= {\overline \varphi}^{\tilde{z}}_k \frac{\int_{{\tilde z}_{k+1}^{\text{top}}}^{{\tilde z}_k^{\text{top}}} \delta \varphi d{\tilde z}}
     {\int_{{\tilde z}_{k+1}^{\text{top}}}^{{\tilde z}_k^{\text{top}}} d{\tilde z}} \\
     &= 0,
$$ (delta-vert-average)

where the last equality is true by definition.

## 9. Layer Equations

### Tracer & Mass

> We first Reynolds' average [](#vh-tracer-pseudo) and given the definition of the operator we can move the averaging past the derivatives and integrals without correction terms to yield

Reviewer: Yes that's right.  In Reynolds' (or my understanding), as long as the function is well behaved the operator can move past a time derivative, so I'd say as long as it is continuous (maybe this is what you mean by smooth) it's okay.

Should I add that caveat for clarity?

$$
\frac{d}{dt} \int_A \int_{\tilde{z}_{k+1}^{\text{bot}}}^{\tilde{z}_k^{\text{top}}} \left<\varphi\right> \, d\tilde{z} \, dA
& + \int_{\partial A} \left( \int_{\tilde{z}_{k+1}^{\text{top}}}^{\tilde{z}_k^{\text{top}}} \left<\varphi \, {\bf u} \right> \, d\tilde{z} \right) \cdot {\bf n}_\perp \, dl & \\
& + \int_A \left<\left\{ \rho_0 \varphi \left[\tilde{w}_{tr} - \tilde{ u} \right] \right\}\right>_{\tilde{z} = \tilde{z}^{\text{top}}} \, dA & \\
& - \int_A \left<\left\{ \rho_0 \varphi \left[\tilde{w}_{tr} - \tilde{ u} \right] \right\}\right>_{\tilde{z} = \tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}}\, dA
& = 0.
$$ (Aintegral-tracer-first-reynolds)

Next, we use a Reynolds' decomposition on any terms involving products inside a Reynolds' averaged,

$$
\frac{d}{dt} \int_A \int_{\tilde{z}_{k+1}^{\text{top}}}^{\tilde{z}_k^{\text{top}}} \left<\varphi \right> \, d\tilde{z} \, dA
& +
\int_{\partial A} \left( \int_{\tilde{z}_{k+1}^{\text{top}}}^{\tilde{z}_k^{\text{top}}} \left(\left<{\varphi}\right>\left<{\bf u}\right> + \left<\varphi^{\prime}{\bf u}^{\prime}\right> \right) d\tilde{z} \right) \, \cdot {\bf n}_\perp \, dl & \\

> & + \int_A \left\{ \rho_0 \left[ \left<\varphi\right>\left<\tilde{w}_{tr}\right> + \left<\varphi^{\prime} \tilde{w}_{tr}^\prime \right> - \left<\varphi\right> \left<\tilde{ u}\right> -\left<\varphi^{\prime} \tilde{ u}^{\prime}\right> \right] \right\}_{z = z^{\text{top}}} \, dA & \\

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
& + \int_A \left\{ \rho_0 \left[ \left<\varphi\right>\left<\tilde{w}_{tr}\right> + \left<\varphi^{\prime} \tilde{w}_{tr}^\prime \right> - \left<\varphi\right> \left<\tilde{ u}\right> -\left<\varphi^{\prime} \tilde{ u}^{\prime}\right> \right] \right\}_{\tilde{z} = \tilde{z}^{\text{top}}} \, dA & \\
```

& - \int_A \left\{ \rho_0 \left[ \left<\varphi\right>\left<\tilde{w}_{tr}\right> + \left<\varphi^{\prime} \tilde{w}_{tr}^\prime \right> - \left<\varphi\right> \left<\tilde{ u}\right> - \left<\varphi^{\prime} \tilde{ u}^{\prime}\right> \right] \right\}_{z = z^{\text{bot}}}\, dA
& = 0.
$$ (Aintegral-tracer-reynolds)

We can rewrite the first two terms in [](#Aintegral-tracer-reynolds) using [](#def-layer-average-reynolds)

$$
\frac{d}{dt} \int_A \tilde{h}_k \, \overline{\left<\varphi\right>}^{\tilde{z}}_k \, dA
& + \int_{\partial A} \left( \tilde{h}_k \, \left[\overline{\left<\varphi\right> \left<{\bf u}\right> + \left<\varphi^{\prime}{\bf u}^{\prime}\right>}^{\tilde{z}}_k \right] \right) \cdot {\bf n}_\perp \, dl & \\
& + \int_A \left\{ \rho_0 \left[ \left<\varphi\right>\left<\tilde{w}_{tr}\right> + \left<\varphi^{\prime} \tilde{w}_{tr}^\prime \right> - \left<\varphi\right> \left<\tilde{ u}\right> -\left<\varphi^{\prime} \tilde{ u}^{\prime}\right> \right] \right\}_{z = z^{\text{top}}} \, dA & \\

> & - \int_A \left\{ \rho_0 \left[ \left<\varphi\right>\left<\tilde{w}_{tr}\right> + \left<\varphi^{\prime} \tilde{w}_{tr}^\prime \right> - \left<\varphi\right> \left<\tilde{ u}\right> - \left<\varphi^{\prime} \tilde{ u}^{\prime}\right> \right] \right\}_{z = z^{\text{bot}}}\, dA

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
& - \int_A \left\{ \rho_0 \left[ \left<\varphi\right>\left<\tilde{w}_{tr}\right> + \left<\varphi^{\prime} \tilde{w}_{tr}^\prime \right> - \left<\varphi\right> \left<\tilde{ u}\right> - \left<\varphi^{\prime} \tilde{ u}^{\prime}\right> \right] \right\}_{\tilde{z} = \tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}}\, dA
```

& = 0.
$$

Given that the horizontal area is not changing in time, we can move the time derivative through the first integral.  We also invoke Green's Theorem for the second integral to convert that from a surface integral to an area integral.  With these changes, the equation becomes

$$
\int_A  \bigl\{ \frac{\partial \tilde{h}_k \, \overline{\left<\varphi\right>}^{\tilde{z}}_k}{\partial t}
& + \nabla \cdot \left[ \tilde{h}_k \, \left(\overline{\left<\varphi\right>}^{\tilde{z}}_k \overline{\left<{\bf u}\right>}^{\tilde{z}}_k + \overline{\delta \varphi \delta {\bf u}}^{\tilde{z}}_k + \overline{\left<\varphi^{\prime}{\bf u}^{\prime}\right>}^{\tilde{z}}_k \right)\right] & \\
& + \left\{ \rho_0 \left[ \left<\varphi\right>\left<\tilde{w}_{tr}\right> + \left<\varphi^{\prime} \tilde{w}_{tr}^\prime \right> - \left<\varphi\right> \left<\tilde{ u}\right> - \left<\varphi^{\prime} \tilde{ u}^{\prime}\right> \right] \right\}_{z = z^{\text{top}}} & \\

> & - \left\{ \rho_0 \left[ \left<\varphi\right>\left<\tilde{w}_{tr}\right> + \left<\varphi^{\prime} \tilde{w}_{tr}^\prime \right> - \left<\varphi\right> \left<\tilde{ u}\right> - \left<\varphi^{\prime} \tilde{ u}^{\prime}\right> \right] \right\}_{z = z^{\text{bot}}} \bigr\}  \, dA

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
& - \left\{ \rho_0 \left[ \left<\varphi\right>\left<\tilde{w}_{tr}\right> + \left<\varphi^{\prime} \tilde{w}_{tr}^\prime \right> - \left<\varphi\right> \left<\tilde{ u}\right> - \left<\varphi^{\prime} \tilde{ u}^{\prime}\right> \right] \right\}_{\tilde{z} = \tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}} \bigr\}  \, dA
```

**Tracer:**

$$
\frac{\partial {\tilde h}_k \overline{\left<\varphi\right>}^{\tilde{z}}_k  }{\partial t}  & + \nabla \cdot \left({\tilde h}_k \overline{\left<\varphi\right>}^{\tilde{z}}_k \overline{\left<{\bf u}\right>}^{\tilde{z}}_k\right) \\
& + \rho_0 \left\{ \left[ \left<\varphi\right> \left<{\tilde w}_{tr}\right> - \left<\varphi\right>\left<\tilde{ u}\right> \right]_{{\tilde z}={\tilde z}_k^{\text{top}}} - \left[ \left<\varphi\right> \left<{\tilde w}_{tr}\right> - \left<\varphi\right>\left<\tilde{ u}\right> \right]_{{\tilde z}={\tilde z}_{k+1}^{\text{bot}}} \right\} \\
& = - \nabla \cdot \left({\tilde h}_k \overline{\left<\varphi^{\prime} {\bf u}^{\prime}\right>}^{\tilde{z}}_k \, + {\tilde h}_k \overline{\delta \varphi \delta {\bf u}}^{\tilde{z}}_k \right) \\
& - \rho_0 \left\{ \left[\left< \varphi^\prime {\tilde w}_{tr}^{\prime} \right> - \left< \varphi^\prime \tilde{ u}^{\prime}\right> \right]_{{\tilde z}={\tilde z}_{k+1}^{\text{top}}} - \left[\left< \varphi^\prime {\tilde w}_{tr}^{\prime} \right> - \left< \varphi^\prime \tilde{ u}^{\prime}\right> \right]_{{\tilde z}={\tilde z}_{k+1}^{\text{bot}}}\right\}.
$$ (layer-tracer)

> A few notes on the layer averaged tracer equation. In this complete form, it includes three types of fluctuating quantities that must be dealt with: (1) the layer averaged, Reynolds' averaged horizontal turbulent flux $\left( \overline{\left<\varphi^{\prime} {\bf u}^{\prime}\right>}^{\tilde{z}}_k \right)$, (2) the Reynolds' average vertical turbulent flux $\left( \left< \varphi^\prime {\tilde w}_{tr}^{\prime} \right> - \left< \varphi^\prime \tilde{u}^{\prime}\right> \right)$, and (3) the layer averaged product of deviations from the layer integrated variables $\left(\overline{\delta \varphi \delta {\bf u}}^{\tilde{z}}_k \right)$. The details of the first two quantities will be discussed later in this document and follow on design documents. The terms involving perturbations from the layer integrated quantity are necessary to extend beyond piecewise constant represenation of variables. In this equation, variables with no overline are the full field variable at the interfaces.

Reviewer 3: Actually maybe we want the option for ensemble-averaged so some of my suggested changes should not be included.

The mass equation is identical to the tracer equation with $\varphi=1$.

**Mass:**

$$
\frac{\partial {\tilde h}_k }{\partial t}
+ \nabla \cdot \left({\tilde h}_k \overline{\left<{\bf u}\right>}^{\tilde{z}}_k\right)
+ \rho_0 \left[ \left<{\tilde w}_{tr}\right> - \left<\tilde{ u}\right> \right]_{{\tilde z}={\tilde z}_k^{\text{top}}}

> - \rho_0 \left[ \left<{\tilde w}_{tr}\right> - \left<\tilde{ u}\right> \right]_{{\tilde z}={\tilde z}_{k+1}^{\text{bot}}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- \rho_0 \left[ \left<{\tilde w}_{tr}\right> - \left<\tilde{ u}\right> \right]_{{\tilde z}={\tilde z}_{k+1}^{\text{top}}}
```

& = - \rho_0 \, \overline{\nabla \left<\Phi\right>}^{\tilde{z}}_k + \frac{1}{\tilde{h}_k} \nabla \left[ \rho_0 \tilde{h}_k \left( \overline{\left< \alpha \right>}^{\tilde{z}}_k \overline{\left<p \right>}^{\tilde{z}}_k + \overline{\delta \alpha \delta p}^{\tilde{z}}_k+ \overline{\left<\alpha^\prime p^\prime\right>}^{\tilde{z}}_k \right) \right] \\
& + \frac{\rho_0}{\tilde{h}_k} \left\{ \left[ \left< \alpha \right> \left<p \nabla \tilde{z}^{\text{top}}\right> + \left<\alpha^\prime \left(p \nabla \tilde{z}^{\text{top}} \right)^\prime\right> \right]_{\tilde{z} = \tilde{z}^{\text{top}}}
-  \left[ \left< \alpha \right> \left<p \nabla \tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}\right> + \left<\alpha^\prime \left(p \nabla \tilde{z}^{\text{bot}} \right)^\prime\right> \right]_{\tilde{z} = \tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}} \right\}.
$$ (layer-momentum-final)

> The $\delta X$ terms in the layered equations are vertical deviations from the vertical layer average of a given quantity $X$.  We will assume these deviations are small and products of these deviations are even smaller.  Thus we will ignore all of these terms in Omega.  We note that these terms could potentially serve as a bridge to multiscale fluxes, as resolution is increased, these $\delta X$ terms would get larger, but likely only for significantly higher resolution (e.g. 10s of meters).  However, these terms would have to be further analyzed and developed as these terms are only deviations from layer averages, not temporal averages as in the Reynolds' approach.

Reviewer 3: We could also add that neglecting the delta terms means that we are doing piece wise approximations of the vertically continuous system

(notational-simplifications)=
### Notational simplifications

Throughout the rest of this document, we will

1. Drop the $< >$ notation around single variables and note that all variables are assumed to be Reynolds' averaged.  Turbulent correlations will retain the angle bracket notation.

> 2. Change the vertical density weighted average notation from $\overline{\varphi}^{\tilde{z}}_k$ to the more simple $\varphi_k$.  Thus, any subscript $k$ implies a vertical average.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Change the vertical density weighted average notation from $\overline{\varphi}^{\tilde{z}}_k$ to the more simple $\varphi_k$.  Thus, any subscript $k$ implies a layer average.
```

**Mass:**

$$
\frac{\partial {\tilde h}_{i,k} }{\partial t}
+ \nabla \cdot \left(\left[{\tilde h}_k\right]_e {\bf u}_{e,k}\right)
+ \rho_0 \left[ \tilde{W}_{tr} \right]_k
- \rho_0 \left[ \tilde{W}_{tr} \right]_{k+1}
= Q_{i,k}.
$$ (discrete-mass)

In this equation, we have added a mass source term ($Q$) that will include sources like river runoff, sea ice freshwater fluxes, precipitation, and evaporation.

**Tracer:**

$$

> \frac{\partial {\tilde h}_{i,k} \varphi_{i,k}}{\partial t}  & + \nabla \cdot \left(\left[{\tilde h}_{i,k} \varphi_{i,k}\right]_e {\bf u}_{e,k}\right) + \rho_0 \left\{ \left[ \varphi \tilde{W}_{tr} \right]_k - \left[ \varphi \tilde{W}_{tr} \right]_{k+1} \right\} \\

Reviewer: @alicebarthel what about this instead -- $\rho_0 \left[ \tilde{W}_{tr} \right]_k^\text{bot}$?

> \frac{\partial {\tilde h}_{i,k} \varphi_{i,k}}{\partial t}  & + \nabla \cdot \left(\left[{\tilde h}_{i,k} \varphi_{i,k}\right]_e {\bf u}_{e,k}\right) + \rho_0 \left\{ \left[ \varphi \tilde{W}_{tr} \right]_k - \left[ \varphi \tilde{W}_{tr} \right]_{k+1} \right\} \\

Reviewer: or should I keep all top and change the k appropriately?

> \frac{\partial {\tilde h}_{i,k} \varphi_{i,k}}{\partial t}  & + \nabla \cdot \left(\left[{\tilde h}_{i,k} \varphi_{i,k}\right]_e {\bf u}_{e,k}\right) + \rho_0 \left\{ \left[ \varphi \tilde{W}_{tr} \right]_k - \left[ \varphi \tilde{W}_{tr} \right]_{k+1} \right\} \\

Reviewer 3: As far as I know, the vert velocity variables are all Top (at least they were in MPAS-O) due to the interface numbering starting from the surface down. So I'd advocate for the final equations to include Top variables, with the appropriate k numbering.

& + \left[ {\bf k} \cdot \nabla \times u_{e,k} +f_v\right]_e\left(u_{e,k}^{\perp}\right) + \left[\nabla K\right]_e  \\
& + \frac{\rho_0}{\left[\tilde{h}_{i,k}\right]_e} \left\{ \left[\left(u - u_k\right) \left\{\tilde{W}_{tr} \right\} \right]_{e,k} - \left[  \left(u - u_k\right) \left\{\tilde{W}_{tr} \right\} \right]_{e,k+1} \right\} \\
& = - \left(\nabla \Phi \right)_{e,k} + \frac{1}{\left[\tilde{h}_k\right]_e} \nabla \left( \tilde{h}_k \alpha_k p_k \right) + \frac{1}{\left[\tilde{h}_k\right]_e} \left\{ \left[ \alpha p \nabla \tilde{z}^{\text{top}}\right]_{e,k} -  \left[ \alpha p \nabla \tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}\right]_{e,k+1} \right\} \\
&  - \frac{1}{\left[\tilde{h}_{i,k}\right]_e} \nabla \cdot \left( \tilde{h}_k \left< {\bf u}^\prime \otimes {\bf u}^\prime \right>_k \right) - \frac{\rho_0}{\left[\tilde{h}_{i,k}\right]_e}  \left\{ \left[ \left<\mathbf{u}^\prime \tilde{w}_{tr}^\prime \right> - \left< \mathbf{u}^\prime \tilde{ u}^\prime \right> \right]_{e,k} - \left[ \left<\mathbf{u}^\prime \tilde{w}_{tr}^\prime \right> - \left< \mathbf{u}^\prime \tilde{ u}^\prime \right> \right]_{e,k+1} \right\}.
$$ (discrete-momentum)

**Diagnostic Relations:**

 $$

>  p_{i,k} = p_{i}^{surf} + g\rho_0 \sum_{k'=1}^{k-1} \tilde{h}_{i,k'} + \frac{1}{2} g\rho_0 \tilde{h}_{i,k}

Reviewer 3: Is the main reason that we describe p at zmid because we want to use it to calculate layer-averaged alpha?

Reviewer: I think this is a question for @sbrus89 and maybe best left for the PGF design doc

Reviewer 4: We will definitely have pressure at interfaces as well in the vertical coordinate class.

The horizontal operators $\nabla$, $\nabla\cdot$, and $\nabla \times$ are now in their discrete form. In the TRiSK design, gradients ($\nabla$) map cell centers to edges; divergence ($\nabla \cdot$) maps edge quantities to cells; and curl ($\nabla \times$) maps edges to vertices. The exact form of operators and interpolation stencils remain the same as those given in {ref}`Omega-0 operator formulation <33-operator-formulation>` The discrete version of terms common with Omega-0, such as advection, potential vorticity, and $\nabla K$, can be found in {ref}`Omega-0 Momentum Terms <34-momentum-terms>` and {ref}`Omega-0 Thickness and Tracer Terms <35-thickness-and-tracer-terms>`.

## 11. Sub gridscale parameterizations

### Horizontal Velocity Dissipation

> There are two terms related to horizontal momentum dissipation in [](#discrete-momentum) that need to be parameterized, $\left<\mathbf{u}^\prime \tilde{u}^\prime \right>_k$ and $\frac{1}{\left[\tilde{h}_{i,k}\right]_e} \nabla \cdot \left( \tilde{h}_k \left< {\bf u}^\prime \otimes {\bf u}^\prime \right>_k \right)$.  The former only arises from the layer integration in psuedo-height coordinates, we interpret this term as the projection of the horizontal momentum dissipation that crosses $\tilde{z}$ interfaces.  Given this, we discuss the form of the horizontal dissipation parameterization first and return to the second term in a later subsection.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are two terms related to horizontal momentum dissipation in [](#discrete-momentum) that need to be parameterized, $\left<\mathbf{u}^\prime \tilde{u}^\prime \right>_k$ and $\frac{1}{\left[\tilde{h}_{i,k}\right]_e} \nabla \cdot \left( \tilde{h}_k \left< {\bf u}^\prime \otimes {\bf u}^\prime \right>_k \right)$.  The former only arises from the layer integration in pseudo-height coordinates, we interpret this term as the projection of the horizontal momentum dissipation that crosses $\tilde{z}$ interfaces.  Given this, we discuss the form of the horizontal dissipation parameterization first and return to the second term in a later subsection.
```

$$
\left[\tilde{u}_{e}\right]_k = u_e \nabla \tilde{z}_{e,k}
$$

in this relation, we have moved the subscript $k$ off the variable itself to prevent confusion with the layer average.  With this definition, [](#discrete-mom-flux-sloping) goes to zero for flat layer surfaces.

#### Vertical velocity dissipation
The vertical turbulent momentum stress is most commonly parameterized as a down-gradient process, i.e.,

$$
\left[ \left<\mathbf{u}^\prime \tilde{w}_{tr}^\prime \right> \right]_{e,k} = -\frac{\nu_v \rho}{\rho_0} \left[\frac{\partial u}{\partial \tilde{z}}\right]_{e,k}
$$

Plugging this relation into the last part of [](#discrete-momentum)

$$
\frac{1}{\left[\tilde{h}_{i,k}\right]_{e,k}}  \left\{ \left[ \nu_v \left[\frac{\partial u}{\partial \tilde{z}}\right]_{e,k} \right]_{e,k} - \left[ \nu_v \left[\frac{\partial u}{\partial \tilde{z}}\right]_{e,k} \right]_{e,k+1}  \right\}
$$ (discrete-mom-vert-diff)

> ##### Vertical derivatives in a finte volume framework

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
##### Vertical derivatives in a finite volume framework
```

Since, Omega will predict layer average quantities (e.g., $u_k$), it's not immediately clear that a traditional discretization is appropriate as there is a discontinuity in the predicted variables at the layer edge.  To circumvent this problem, we turn to weak derivatives instead of traditional pointwise forms.  A weak derivative of $\varphi$ is defined as

$$
\int_{\tilde{z}_{k+1/2}^{\text{top}}}^{\tilde{z}_{k-1/2}^{\text{top}}} \varphi^\prime \psi d\tilde{z} = \varphi \psi - \int_{\tilde{z}_{k+1/2}^{\text{top}}}^{\tilde{z}_{k-1/2}^{\text{top}}} \varphi \psi^\prime d\tilde{z}.
$$ (weak-derivative-defn)

> Here $\psi$ is a smooth test function.  If we choose $\psi$ such that it has compact support on the interval $(\tilde{z}_{k+1/2}^{\text{top}},\tilde{z}_{k-1/2}^{\text{top}})$ then the first term on the right hand side of [](#weak-derivative-defn) is zero.  Using the fact that Omega predicts layer averages, the integral on the right hand side can be broken into

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Here $\psi$ is a smooth test function.  If we choose $\psi$ such that it has compact support on the interval $]\tilde{z}_{k+1/2}^{\text{top}},\tilde{z}_{k-1/2}^{\text{top}}[$ then the first term on the right hand side of [](#weak-derivative-defn) is zero.  Using the fact that Omega predicts layer averages, the integral on the right hand side can be broken into
```
then we have clearly set ourselves up for zero values on end points.

Reviewer: I don't think that is right.  In my experience () in a range means the end points are not included.  I don't understand the backwards bracket

Reviewer 3: ok, then it is just a different notation convention. Let's keep it as is.

$$
-\int_{\tilde{z}_{k+1/2}^{\text{top}}}^{\tilde{z}_{k-1/2}^{\text{top}}} \varphi \psi^\prime d\tilde{z} = - \int_{\tilde{z}_{k+1/2}^{\text{top}}}^{\tilde{z}_{k}^{\text{top}}} \varphi_{k+1} \psi(z)^\prime d\tilde{z} - \int_{\tilde{z}_{k}^{\text{top}}}^{\tilde{z}_{k-1/2}^{\text{top}}} \varphi_k \psi(z)^\prime d\tilde{z}.
$$

Since $\varphi$ is constant over the integral domain, it can be pulled outside the integral and we use the fundamental theorem to yield

$$
-\varphi_{k+1} (\psi(k)-\psi(k+1/2)) - \varphi_k (\psi(k-1/2) - \psi(k)).
$$

Since we have assumed $\psi$ has compact support within the interval but not including the endpoints, $\psi(k-1/2) = \psi(k+1/2) = 0$ and we are left with

$$
\int_{\tilde{z}_{k+1/2}^{\text{top}}}^{\tilde{z}_{k-1/2}^{\text{top}}} \varphi^\prime \psi d\tilde{z} = \psi(k) \left(\varphi_k - \varphi_{k+1}\right).
$$

Since we are able to pick any test function that satisfies our assumptions, we choose the dirac delta function and rewrite the previous equation as

$$
\varphi^\prime(z) = \left(\varphi_k - \varphi_{k+1}\right) \delta \left(z-\tilde{z}_{k}^{\text{top}}\right).
$$ (weak-derivative)

> If [](#weak-derivative) is averaged between $\tilde{z}_{k-1/2}^{\text{top}}$ and $\tilde{z}_{k+1/2}^{\text{top}}$, we arrive at the expected form of the gradient

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If [](#weak-derivative) is averaged between $\tilde{z}_{k-1/2}^{\text{top}}$ and $\tilde{z}_{k+1/2}^{\text{top}}$, we arrive at the expected form of the gradient centered on layer interfaces
```

$$
\left[\frac{\partial \varphi}{\partial z}\right]_{avg} = \frac{\left(\varphi_k - \varphi_{k+1}\right)}{0.5 \left(\tilde{h}_k + \tilde{h}_{k+1}\right)}
$$ (weak-deriv-final)

where $0.5 \left(\tilde{h}_k + \tilde{h}_{k+1}\right)$ is the distance between $\tilde{z}_{k-1/2}^{\text{top}}$ and $\tilde{z}_{k+1/2}^{\text{top}}$.  A similar derivation can be followed to compute gradients across layer centers.  This will form discrete derivatives in Omega.

With this, we can now fully discretize [](#discrete-mom-vert-diff) as

$$
-\frac{\rho_0}{\left[\tilde{h}_k\right]_e} \left\{ \left[\left<u^\prime \tilde{w}_{tr}^\prime\right> \right]_{e,k} - \left[\left<u^\prime \tilde{w}_{tr}^\prime\right> \right]_{e,k+1} \right\} = -\frac{\rho_0}{\left[\tilde{h}_k\right]_e} \left\{ \frac{\left(u_{e,k-1} - u_{e,k}\right)}{0.5 \left(\tilde{h}_k-1 + \tilde{h}_{k}\right)} - \frac{\left(u_{e,k} - u_{e,k+1}\right)}{0.5 \left(\tilde{h}_k + \tilde{h}_{k+1}\right)} \right\}.
$$ (final-vert-vel-dissipation)

This form can be interfaced with the Omega [tridiagongal solver](TridiagonalSolver.md) routine.

### Forcing at the top and bottom of the ocean

> The discretized momentum and tracer forcing appear as the surface value of the vertical turbulent fluxes of tracer and momentum.  Omega also includes a ocean floor vertical turbulent flux of momentum.

Reviewer 3: Note that it may not be restricted to the surface value if we end up spreading external forcing. Or is that out of scope for Omegav1?

The tracer equation is simply mass conservation, where the conserved quantity is the tracer mass $\rho \varphi$, as $\varphi$ is the tracer concentration per unit mass.
In all three equations, the first term is the change of the quantity within the control volume; the second term is the flux through the moving boundary.
If the control surface moves with the fluid in a Lagrangian fashion, then ${\bf v}_r={\bf v}$ and the second term (flux through the boundary) vanishes---there is no net mass, momentum, or tracer transport across the moving surface.

The momentum equation is an expression of Newton's second law and includes two types of external forces.
The first is the body force, represented here as ${\bf b}({\bf x}, t)$, which encompasses any volumetric force acting throughout the fluid, such as gravitational acceleration or the Coriolis force. In some contexts, body forces may be expressible as the gradient of a potential, ${\bf b} = -\nabla_{3D} \Phi$, but this is not assumed in general.

> The second is the surface force ${\bf f}$, which acts on the boundary of the control volume and includes pressure and viscous stresses. These forces appear as surface integrals over the boundary and drive momentum exchange between adjacent fluid parcels or between the fluid and its environment.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The second is the surface force ${\bf \tau}$, which acts on the boundary of the control volume and includes pressure and viscous stresses. These forces appear as surface integrals over the boundary and drive momentum exchange between adjacent fluid parcels or between the fluid and its environment.
```

The derivation of the momentum equation may also be found in [Leishman 2025](https://eaglepubs.erau.edu/introductiontoaerospaceflightvehicles/chapter/conservation-of-momentum-momentum-equation/#chapter-260-section-2), Chapter 21, equation 10.

## 4. Hydrostatic Approximation

In large-scale geophysical flows, vertical accelerations are typically much smaller than the vertical pressure gradient and gravitational forces. As a result, we adopt the **hydrostatic approximation**, which simplifies the vertical momentum equation by assuming a leading-order balance between pressure and gravity:

$$
\frac{\partial p}{\partial z} = -\rho g
$$ (hydrostatic)

This balance allows us to express the pressure at any depth $z$ in terms of an integral over the density field above:

$$
p(x,y,z,t) = p^{\text{surf}}(x,y,t) + \int_{z}^{z^{\text{surf}}} \rho(x,y,z',t) g \, dz'
$$ (pressure)

> Here, $p^{\text{surf}}$ is the pressure at the free surface $z^{\text{surf}}(x, y, t)$, and $\rho(z')$ is the local fluid density. This relation holds pointwise in space and time and provides a foundation for defining vertical coordinates based on pressure.

Reviewer 5: It isn't clear why the notation `z'` is used.

The hydrostatic approximation also simplifies vertical pressure forces in control-volume integrations. For example, in a finite-volume cell bounded above and below by sloping surfaces, the vertical pressure force reduces to:

$$

> - p|_{z = z^{\text{top}}} + p|_{z = z^{\text{bot}}}

Reviewer 5: Is there a point later on where this is helpful? If so, can we cite an equation?

$$ (w-tilde)

In this formulation:
- $\tilde{w}$ is the vertical **mass flux per unit reference density**, a key variable in a non-Boussinesq framework.
- Vertical transport of mass, tracers, and momentum will use $\tilde{w}$ rather than volume flux $w$.

[Griffies 2018](https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctv301gzg) p. 37  argues for the use of pseudo-velocities, which he calls the density-weighted velocity, for non-Boussinesq models.
Griffies recommends a value of $\rho_0=1035$ kg/m$^3$, following p. 47 of [Gill (1982)](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0074-6142(08)60028-5), because ocean density varies less than 2% from that value.

The use of a constant $\rho_0$ in defining pseudo-height does not imply the Boussinesq approximation. In Boussinesq models, $\rho$ is set to $\rho_0$ everywhere except in the buoyancy term (i.e., the vertical pressure gradient or gravitational forcing). Here, by contrast, we retain the full $\rho$ in all terms, and use $\rho_0$ only as a normalization constant—for example, so that $d\tilde{z} \approx dz$ when $\rho \approx \rho_0$. This preserves full mass conservation while making vertical units more intuitive.

> This approach ensures consistency with mass conservation and simplifies vertical discretization.

Reviewer: changed

> > **Note:** This definition does not invoke the Boussinesq approximation. The full, time- and space-dependent density $\rho(x, y, z, t)$ is retained in all conservation laws. The use of $\rho_0$ is solely for normalization.

Reviewer: No, z' only appears in integration.  I'm going to leave this as is as I've added the comment about z' above.

> > **Note:** This definition does not invoke the Boussinesq approximation. The full, time- and space-dependent density $\rho(x, y, z, t)$ is retained in all conservation laws. The use of $\rho_0$ is solely for normalization.

Reviewer 5: Sounds good. I'll resolve this one

### 5.1. Justification for Pseudo-Height Definition

Alternative definitions could add an arbitrary offset, e.g., setting $\tilde{z} = 0$ at mean sea level. However, the adopted form:

$$
\tilde{z} = -\frac{1}{\rho_0 g} \, p
$$

was chosen for its practical advantages:
- It ensures that $\tilde{z}$ varies identically to pressure.
- Units of $\tilde{z}$, $\tilde{h}$, and $\tilde{w}$ are intuitive.
- It aligns layer thickness with pressure thickness: $\tilde{h} = \Delta \tilde{z} \propto \Delta p$
- $\tilde{z}^{\text{floor}} \propto p^{\text{bot}}$, which aids barotropic pressure gradient calculation.

This makes $\tilde{z}$ a natural coordinate for a mass-conserving hydrostatic model.

## 6. Horizontal and Vertical Flux Separation in Pseudo-Height Coordinates

In geophysical flows, the vertical and horizontal directions are treated differently due to rotation and stratification, which lead to distinct characteristic scales of motion. To reflect this, we separate horizontal and vertical fluxes explicitly in the governing equations.

> We partition the control surface of a finite-volume cell into the side walls $\partial V^{\text{side}}$ (which are fixed in space) and the upper and lower pseudo-height surfaces $\partial V^{\text{top}}(t)$ and $\partial V^{\text{bot}}(t)$, which evolve in time.

Reviewer: I think it should be space and time

**Mass:**

$$
\frac{\partial {\tilde h}_{i,k} }{\partial t}
+ \nabla \cdot \left(\left[{\tilde h}_k\right]_e {\bf u}_{e,k}\right)
+ \rho_0 \left[ \tilde{W}_{tr} \right]_k
- \rho_0 \left[ \tilde{W}_{tr} \right]_{k+1}
= Q_{i,k}.
$$ (discrete-mass)

In this equation, we have added a mass source term ($Q$) that will include sources like river runoff, sea ice freshwater fluxes, precipitation, and evaporation.

**Tracer:**

$$
\frac{\partial {\tilde h}_{i,k} \varphi_{i,k}}{\partial t}  & + \nabla \cdot \left(\left[{\tilde h}_{i,k} \varphi_{i,k}\right]_e {\bf u}_{e,k}\right) + \rho_0 \left\{ \left[ \varphi \tilde{W}_{tr} \right]_k - \left[ \varphi \tilde{W}_{tr} \right]_{k+1} \right\} \\
& = - \nabla \cdot \left({\tilde h}_k \left<\varphi^{\prime} {\bf u}^{\prime}\right>_k \right) - \rho_0 \left\{ \left[\left< \varphi^\prime {\tilde w}_{tr}^{\prime} \right> - \left< \varphi^\prime \tilde{ u}^{\prime}\right> \right]_k - \left[\left< \varphi^\prime {\tilde w}_{tr}^{\prime} \right> - \left< \varphi^\prime \tilde{ u}^{\prime}\right> \right]_{k+1}\right\}.
$$ (discrete-tracer)

> In the tracer equation, we note that surface fluxes (e.g. latent heat fluxes) will appear in the surface value of the vertical turbulent tracer flux (e.g., $\left<\varphi^\prime \tilde{w}_{tr}^\prime\right>_{k=0}$).  The terms on the second line represent the small scale turbulence and the form used in Omega to represent these terms will be discussed in the next section.

Reviewer: can we keep these in the surface flux term for now and make a comment about it?  I don't think it's necessary to specify that level of detail now.

$$
\tilde{z}(z_b) = -M.
$$ (def-total-pseudo-height)

**Note:** Because $z$ appears as the *lower bound* of the integral in equation [](#def-pseudo-height), we have
$$
\frac{d\tilde{z}}{dz} = \rho(z), \quad \text{so} \quad d\tilde{z} = \rho(z)\,dz.
$$
This means that pseudo-height $\tilde{z}$ increases in the same direction as $z$: both are **zero at the surface** (or close to it) and become **increasingly negative with depth**.

Under hydrostatic balance, we have:

$$
\frac{dp}{dz} = -\rho g \quad \Rightarrow \quad dp = -\rho g\,dz \quad \Rightarrow \quad \rho\,dz = -\frac{dp}{g},
$$ (hydrostatic-balance)

which allows us to express pseudo-height in terms of pressure:

$$
\tilde{z} = -\frac{p - p_s}{g}, \quad \text{or equivalently,} \quad p = p_s - g\tilde{z},
$$ (pseudo-height-pressure)

where $p_s$ is the pressure at the ocean surface. This makes $\tilde{z}$ a natural coordinate for tracer and mass budgets when $\rho$ is known as a function of pressure, as is the case in TEOS-10, our proposed equation of state.

Given $\rho(\tilde{z})$, we can recover geometric height via:

$$
z(\tilde{z}) = z_s + \int_{0}^{\tilde{z}} \frac{1}{\rho(\tilde{z}')} \, d\tilde{z}',

> $$ (invert-z-from-pseudo)

Reviewer 6: That's true.  We don't know `z_s`.  We should definitely fix that, after we change to the new definition of $\tilde{z} = - p/g$.

noting that the integral moves downward in the column (i.e., toward more negative $\tilde{z}$).

We now formulate the mass and tracer conservation equations in a finite volume using $\tilde{z}$ as the vertical coordinate.

## 4. Tracer and Mass Equations

Here, we closely follow Appendix A2 from Ringler et al. (2013). They state, "The variable $\phi(x, y, z, t)$ may be the fluid density q or the density-weighted concentration of some tracer, in units of tracer mass per volume." This means that $\phi = \rho \varphi$, where $\varphi$ is what we are using as the definition of a tracer.

We begin with their equations (A.10)-(A.13) which are agnostic to our choice of mass-thickness:

$$

> h(x, y, t) = \int_{z^{\text{bot}}}^{z^{\text{top}}} \rho \, dz =  \tilde{z}^{\text{top}}(x, y, t) - \tilde{z}^{\text{bot}} (x, y, t).

Reviewer 5: Can we use tilde's for the mass-thickness variable `h` as well?

Reviewer 3: I like that suggestion.

$$ (def-pressure-thickness)

> Instead of geometric thickness to define our layers. Starting at their (A.14), it is useful to write the equation in terms of vertical mass flux per unit area $\omega = \rho w$ instead of vertical velocity $w$:

Reviewer 5: Would it be consistent to also use \tilde{w} here?

Reviewer 6: Another great suggestion!

- \int_{A} [\varphi (\omega - \omega_r)]_{\tilde{z} = \tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}} \, dA = 0.
$$ (tracer-Az-int)

The assumption of hydostatic balance allows a change of coordinate to the pseudo-height described in the previous section. Tracer conservation may be rewritten as

$$
\frac{d}{dt} \int_{A} \int_{\tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}}^{\tilde{z}^{\text{top}}} \varphi \, d\tilde{z} \, dA + \int_{\partial A} \left( \int_{\tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}}^{\tilde{z}^{\text{top}}} \varphi \mathbf{u} \, d\tilde{z} \right) \cdot \mathbf{n} \, dl + \int_{A} [\varphi (\omega - \omega_r)]_{\tilde{z} = \tilde{z}^{\text{top}}} \, dA
- \int_{A} [\varphi (\omega - \omega_r)]_{\tilde{z} = \tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}} \, dA = 0,
$$ (tracer-Aztilde-int)

where we define the pressure surfaces $\tilde{z}^{\text{top}}\equiv \tilde{z}(z^{\text{top}})$ and $\tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}\equiv \tilde{z}(z^{\text{bot}})$.
The equivalent of their (A.16) is our equation for mass-thickness above. The vertical average of a variable, their (A.17) becomes:

$$

> \overline{\varphi}^{\tilde{z}}(x, y, t) = \frac{1}{h} \int_{z^{\text{bot}}}^{z^{\text{top}}} \varphi(x, y, z, t) \rho g \, dz \\

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
\overline{\varphi}^{\tilde{z}}(x, y, t) = \frac{1}{h} \int_{z^{\text{bot}}}^{z^{\text{top}}} \varphi(x, y, z, t) \rho \, dz \\
```

Author: Agreed. Done.

 = \frac{1}{h} \int_{\tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}}^{\tilde{z}^{\text{top}}} \varphi(x, y, z, t)  \, d\tilde{z}.
$$ (def-tracer-avg)

The conservation equation now becomes:

$$
\frac{d}{dt} \int_{A} h \, \overline{\varphi}^{\tilde{z}} \, dA
+ \int_{\partial A} h \, \overline{\varphi\mathbf{u}}^{\tilde{z}} \cdot \mathbf{n} \, dl
+ \int_{A} [\varphi \omega_{tr}]_{\tilde{z} = \tilde{z}^{\text{top}}} \, dA
- \int_{A} [\varphi \omega_{tr}]_{\tilde{z} = \tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}} \, dA = 0,
$$ (tracer-Aint-ztildeavg)

where $\omega_{\text{tr}}$ is the mass transport per unit area through the top and bottom surfaces. Making use of their (A.19) and (A.20), we arrive at:

$$
\frac{d}{dt} \overline{h \, \overline{\varphi}^{\tilde{z}}}^A
+ \frac{1}{\tilde{A}} \int_{\partial A} h \, \overline{\varphi\mathbf{u}}^{\tilde{z}} \cdot \mathbf{n} \, dl
+ \left. \overline{\varphi \omega_{tr}}^A \right|_{\tilde{z} = \tilde{z}^{\text{top}}}
- \left. \overline{\varphi \omega_{tr}}^A \right|_{\tilde{z} = \tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}} = 0,
$$ (tracer-Aavg-ztildeavg)

> which is their (A.21), except with $\phi = \rho g \varphi$ and $w \rightarrow \omega$. Taking the limit $\tilde{A} \rightarrow 0$, we get:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
which is their (A.21), except with $\phi = \rho \varphi$ and $w \rightarrow \omega$. Taking the limit $\tilde{A} \rightarrow 0$, we get:
```

$$

> \frac{\partial}{\partial t} h \, \overline{\varphi}^{\tilde{z}} + \nabla \cdot (h \, \overline{\varphi\mathbf{u}}^{\tilde{z}} ) + [\varphi \omega_{tr}]_{\tilde{z} = \tilde{z}^{\text{top}}} - [\varphi \omega_{tr}]_{\tilde{z} = \tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}} = 0.

Author: Agreed. I changed all the horizontal `\nabla` to `\nabla_z` in the new sections.

$$ (mass-layered)

This is nearly identical to their (A.25) but with the pressure-thickness and $\omega$.

## 5. Horizontal Momentum Equation

We now derive the horizontal momentum equation in our non-Boussinesq, hydrostatic framework, following the same finite-volume approach used for mass and tracer conservation. We work with a pseudo-height vertical coordinate $\tilde{z}$ as defined in [Pseudo-Height Coordinate Section](pseudo-height).

We begin by considering conservation of horizontal momentum density $ \rho \mathbf{u} $ over a time-dependent control volume $ V(t) $, bounded horizontally by a fixed area $ A $, and vertically by surfaces $ \tilde{z}^{\text{top}}(x, y, t) $ and $ \tilde{z}^{\text{bot}}(x, y, t) $. The finite-volume balance reads:

$$
\frac{d}{dt} \int_{V(t)} \rho \mathbf{u} \, dV
+ \int_{\partial V(t)} \rho \mathbf{u} (\mathbf{v} - \mathbf{v}_r) \cdot \mathbf{n} \, dA
= \mathbf{F}_\text{total}[V(t)],
$$ (momentum-FV)

with total forces given by:

$$
\mathbf{F}_\text{total}[V(t)] =
- \int_{V(t)} \rho\, \mathbf{f} \times \mathbf{u} \, dV
- \int_{V(t)} \rho\, \nabla \Phi \, dV

> - \int_{\partial V(t)} p \, \mathbf{n} \, dA

Reviewer 3: A notation suggestion: could we use dS (as a partner to dV) rather than dA. To me that makes more sense as dA is often used for fixed areas.

Reviewer 6: Yes, I like that better since this is not the same dA as below.

- **Omega-2.1: E3SM fully coupled** Ability to run G cases (active ocean and sea ice) and B cases (all components active) within E3SM. This will include: a full vertical mixing scheme, such as KPP; frazil ice formation in the ocean; and a submosescale parameterization. Parameterizations mean for lower resolutions, such as Gent-McWilliams and Redi mixing, will not be in this version. Simulations can be run at high resolution and compared to previous E3SM simulations, including [Petersen et al. 2019](https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/2018MS001373) and [Caldwell et al. 2019](https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2019MS001870).

This document describes the governing equations for the layered ocean model, which are applicable for Omega-1.0 onwards. Specific terms, such as the pressure gradient, vertical mixing, and parameterizations, are left in their general form here but are described in more detail in other design documents.

> <!---

Author: Thanks. Removed. Those notes were from the V0 version or the Overleaf version, and I was using them for reference.

## Main References
This document is based on [de Szoeke and Samelson, 2002](https://journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/phoc/32/7/1520-0485_2002_032_2194_tdbtba_2.0.co_2.xml), [Losch et al. 2004](https://journals.ametsoc.org/downloadpdf/view/journals/phoc/34/1/1520-0485_2004_034_0306_hsacgc_2.0.co_2.pdf), and [Adcroft's 2004 lecture notes](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/12-950-atmospheric-and-oceanic-modeling-spring-2004/resources/lec25). Other references of interest include: [Hallberg et al., 2024](https://www.cesm.ucar.edu/sites/default/files/2024-02/2024-OMWG-B-Hallberg.pdf), [Losch et al poster](http://mitgcm.org/~mlosch/NBposter.pdf), [MOM6 code](https://github.com/mom-ocean/MOM6/blob/main/src/core/MOM_PressureForce_Montgomery.F90)... MOM6 has 2 different Pressure Gradient implementations: Finite Volume (including an analytical integration based on [Adcroft et al., 2007](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1463500308000243)) and Montgomery-potential form (based on [Hallberg, 2005](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1463500304000046)), both of which can be used in non-Boussinesq mode.

# Mark
--->

## Requirements

> The requirements in the Omega-0 design document still apply. Additional design requirements for Omega-1 are:

Author: done.

### Omega will be an incompressible, hydrostatic, non-Boussinesq ocean model.
See discussion in introduction. Non-Boussinesq changes the independant vertical variable to pressure, and mass conservation equation to be pressure-thickness, $h=\Delta p$.

### Omega will use TEOS10 for the equation of state.

> See additional EOS design document.

Author: done.

### Omega-1.0 will add new terms for the pressure gradient, vertical mixing, and vertical advection.
See individual design documents for each term.

> <!--

Author: done.

+ h_k \frac{\partial }{\partial z} \left( \kappa_v \frac{\partial \varphi_k}{\partial z} \right).
$$ (mpaso-continuous-tracer)

The layer thickness $h$, vertical velocity $w$, pressure $p$, and tracer $\varphi$, are cell-centered quantities, while the horizontal velocity ${\mathbf u}$ and $e$ superscript are variables interpolated to the cell edges.

### Continuous Equations
The continuous form of the conservation equations are as follows [Kundu et al. 2024](https://www.amazon.com/Fluid-Mechanics-Pijush-K-Kundu/dp/012405935X), chapter 4, eqns 4.7 and 4.22. This is before any assumptions are made, so this is a compressible, non-hydrostatic, non-Boussinesq fluid. Here all variables are a function of $(x,y,z)$, $\bf u$ denotes the horizontal velocity vector, $w$ is the vertical velocity, ${\bf u} \otimes {\bf u} = {\bf u}{\bf u}^T$ is the tensor product, $\nabla$ is the horizontal gradient, and other variables defined in the [section below](#variable-definitions).

momentum:

$$
\frac{D \rho {\bf u} }{D t} \equiv
\frac{\partial \rho {\bf u}}{\partial t}
 + \nabla \cdot \left( \rho {\bf u} \otimes {\bf u}  \right)
+ w\frac{\partial \rho {\bf u}}{\partial z}
  = - \nabla p 

> - \rho f {\bf k} \times {\bf u}

Author: Thanks. I added new [General Vertical Coordinate](https://portal.nersc.gov/project/e3sm/mpeterse/omega/design-doc-v1-eqns/_build/html/design/OmegaV1GoverningEqns.html#general-vertical-coordinate) and [Pressure Gradient](https://portal.nersc.gov/project/e3sm/mpeterse/omega/design-doc-v1-eqns/_build/html/design/OmegaV1GoverningEqns.html#pressure-gradient) sections to really nail this down. I made corresponding changes in the layer equations as well. Before those sections I use `\nabla_z` to show that the pressure gradient is in the vertical.

$$
\nabla \cdot \left( {\bf u} \otimes {\bf u}  \right) = 
\boldsymbol{u} \cdot \nabla \boldsymbol{u} &= (\nabla \times \boldsymbol{u}) \times \boldsymbol{u} + \nabla \frac{|\boldsymbol{u}|^2}{2} \\
&= \{\boldsymbol{k} \cdot (\nabla \times \boldsymbol{u})\} \boldsymbol{k} \times \boldsymbol{u} + \nabla \frac{|\boldsymbol{u}|^2}{2} \\
&= \zeta \boldsymbol{u}^{\perp} + \nabla K.
$$ (advection-identity)

where $\zeta$ is relative vorticity and $K$ is kinetic energy. This is used to produce the final formulation below.

For a primitive equation ocean model, we assume the fluid is incompressible and hydrostatic. For Omega we are not making the Boussinesq assumption, so all density terms are the full density. In particular, the density coefficient of the pressure gradient in [](#continuous-momentum-R13App) is not a constant, as it is in primitive equation models like POP and MPAS-Ocean.

**Incompressible:** Assume that the three-dimensional velocity field is nondivergent,

$$
 \nabla \cdot {\bf u} + \frac{\partial w}{\partial z}  = 0.
$$ (continuous-incompressible)

**Hydrostatic:** Beginning with the vertical momentum equation,

$$
\frac{D w }{D t} 
  = 

>   - \frac{1}{\rho} \frac{\partial p}{\partial z} - g + {\bf D}^u + {\bf F}^u

Author: This is vertical momentum, so is already the k-component of a 3D equation. In the vector equation it would be $g {\bf k}$ or similar, but here all terms are scalar.

>   - \frac{1}{\rho} \frac{\partial p}{\partial z} - g + {\bf D}^u + {\bf F}^u

Author: Never mind, I misunderstood. Yes, I can use geopotential.

>   - \frac{1}{\rho} \frac{\partial p}{\partial z} - g + {\bf D}^u + {\bf F}^u

Reviewer 6: I think you're probably right that the vertical gradient of `Phi` is always going to be `g` even if there is a horizontal gradient.  So maybe we don't need to pedantically put it in the equations.

$$ (continuous-vert-mom)

assume that advection of vertical momentum $Dw/Dt$, dissipation, and forcing are small, and that the first order balance is between pressure gradient and gravity,

$$
\frac{\partial p}{\partial z}

>   = - \rho g.

Author: Leaving as g. See previous comment.

The constitutive equation is the equation of state,

$$
\rho = f_{eos}(p,T,S).
$$ (continuous-eos-R13App)
where are temperature and salinity ($T$ and $S$) are examples of tracers $\varphi$.

Momentum diffusion terms include

$$
{\bf D}^u =  {\bf D}^u_h + {\bf D}^u_v
$$ (continuous-mom_diff-R13App)
$$
 {\bf D}^u_v=\frac{\partial }{\partial z}
\left( \nu_v \frac{\partial {\bf u}}{\partial z} \right)
$$ (continuous-v_mom_diff-R13App)
$$
 {\bf D}^u_h=\nu_h \nabla^2 \bf u = \nu_h(\nabla \delta + {\bf k}\times \nabla \eta)
$$ (continuous-h_mom_diff-R13App)
and may also include a del-4 term, Rayleigh drag, and bottom drag. Momentum forcing is due to wind stress.

Tracer diffusion terms include

$$
D^\varphi =  D^\varphi_h + D^\varphi_v
$$ (continuous-tracer_diff-R13App)
$$
 D^\varphi_v = \rho \frac{\partial }{\partial z}
  \left( \kappa_v \frac{\partial \varphi}{\partial z} \right),
$$ (continuous-v_tr_diff-R13App)
$$
 D^\varphi_h = \nabla\cdot\left(\rho \kappa_h \nabla\varphi \right).
$$ (continuous-h_tr_diff-R13App)
and may also include a del-4 term. Sources and sinks include surface fluxes from the atmosphere and land, and bio-geo-chemical reactions.

> <!---

Author: done.

= 
\kappa_2 h \nabla_r^2 \varphi 
- \kappa_4 h \nabla_r^4 \varphi
+ h \frac{\partial }{\partial z} \left( \kappa_v \frac{\partial \varphi}{\partial z} \right).
$$ (continuous-tracer)
--->

### Layered Equations

Omega-1 will be non-Boussinesq, which means that density is not assumed to be constant in any terms. This results in a mass conservation equation, rather than a volume conservation equation. The fully continuous equations were presented in the previous section. Here we derive the layered equations by discretizing in the vertical, while the horizontal remains continuous. We discretize by integrating in the vertical from the surface $z=s_k^{bot}$ to $z=s_k^{top}$ for the layer with index $k$, as described in [Ringler et al. 2013](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1463500313000760) Appendix A.2. Equivalently, we can vertically integrate from a lower pressure surface $p=\sigma_k^{bot}$ to $p=\sigma_k^{top}$ where $p$ and $z$ are related by the hydrostatic pressure equation [](#continuous-hydrostatic-pressure).

For non-Boussinesq layered equations we begin by defining the pressure-thickness of layer $k$ as

$$ (sigma-int-to-surf)

> where $\eta$ is the sea surface height and $p^{surf}$ is the surface pressure. Note that the negative sign means that pressure increases with depth, so positive $p$ points downward, so that the $top$ and $bot$ extents of the integration limits are flipped in [](#depth-pressure-integral-conversion).

Reviewer 6: The link here doesn't seem to be working.

Author: Done. I missed a copy-paste from another doc.

= \frac{\int_{s_k^{bot}}^{s_k^{top}} \rho g \varphi dz}{\int_{s_k^{bot}}^{s_k^{top}} \rho g dz}
= \frac{\int_{\sigma_k^{top}}^{\sigma_k^{bot}} \varphi dp}{\int_{\sigma_k^{top}}^{\sigma_k^{bot}} dp}
= \frac{\int_{\sigma_k^{top}}^{\sigma_k^{bot}} \varphi dp}{h_k}
$$(def-thickness-pressure-average)

Our derivation has not made any assumptions about density, and may be used for both Boussinesq and non-Boussinesq fluids. However, for a Boussinesq fluid it is convenient to define a simple thickness as

$$
h_k^{Bouss}(x,y,t)
 \equiv \int_{s_k^{bot}}^{s_k^{top}} dz.
$$
The definition of the thickness-weighted average remains the same as in [](#def-thickness-pressure-average), but in a Boussinesq fluid the variations in density are assumed to be small, so that $\rho(x,y,z,t)\sim\rho_0$ where $\rho_0$ is a constant. 

We can now derive the layered quations by multiplying the equations by $\rho g$ and integrating in $z$ from $s_k^{bot}$ to $s_k^{top}$,

momentum:

$$
\frac{\partial }{\partial t} \int_{s_k^{bot}}^{s_k^{top}} \rho g{\bf u} dz
+  \int_{s_k^{bot}}^{s_k^{top}} \rho g \eta {\bf k} \times {\bf u} dz
+  \int_{s_k^{bot}}^{s_k^{top}} \rho g w\frac{\partial {\bf u}}{\partial z} dz

>   =  \int_{s_k^{bot}}^{s_k^{top}} \left[- \frac{1}{\rho}\nabla p - \nabla K

Author: Thanks. I switch to `\nabla \Phi` in [Final Layered Equations](https://portal.nersc.gov/project/e3sm/mpeterse/omega/design-doc-v1-eqns/_build/html/design/OmegaV1GoverningEqns.html#final-layered-equations) and added a discussion.

+ {\bf D}^u + {\bf F}^u \right] dz
$$ (layer-int-momentum-R13App)

mass:

$$
\frac{\partial }{\partial t}  \int_{s_k^{bot}}^{s_k^{top}} \rho g dz
 +\nabla \cdot \left( \int_{s_k^{bot}}^{s_k^{top}} \rho g  {\bf u} dz \right)
 + \int_{s_k^{bot}}^{s_k^{top}}\frac{\partial}{\partial z} \left(  \rho g  w \right) dz
= \int_{s_k^{bot}}^{s_k^{top}} S^h dz
$$ (layer-int-mass-R13App)

tracer:

$$
\frac{\partial }{\partial t} \int_{s_k^{bot}}^{s_k^{top}} \rho g \varphi  dz
 + \nabla \cdot \left( \int_{s_k^{bot}}^{s_k^{top}} \rho g \varphi {\bf u} dz  \right)
 + \int_{s_k^{bot}}^{s_k^{top}} \frac{\partial}{\partial z} \left(  \rho g \varphi w \right) dz
= \int_{s_k^{bot}}^{s_k^{top}} \left( D^\varphi + S^\varphi \right) dz
$$ (layer-int-tracer-R13App)

Equivalently, these equations may be written as integrating in pressure in the vertical from $\sigma_k^{bot}$ to $\sigma_k^{top}$:

momentum:

$$
\frac{\partial }{\partial t} \int_{\sigma_k^{bot}}^{\sigma_k^{top}} {\bf u} dp
+  \int_{\sigma_k^{bot}}^{\sigma_k^{top}}  \eta {\bf k} \times {\bf u} dp
+  \int_{\sigma_k^{bot}}^{\sigma_k^{top}}  w\frac{\partial {\bf u}}{\partial z} dp

>   =  \int_{\sigma_k^{bot}}^{\sigma_k^{top}} \left[ - \frac{1}{\rho}\nabla p - \nabla K

Author: Thanks. I switch to `\nabla \Phi` in [Final Layered Equations](https://portal.nersc.gov/project/e3sm/mpeterse/omega/design-doc-v1-eqns/_build/html/design/OmegaV1GoverningEqns.html#final-layered-equations) and added a discussion.

+ {\bf D}^u + {\bf F}^u \right] dp
$$ (layer-int-momentum-R13App)

mass:

$$
\frac{\partial }{\partial t}  \int_{s_k^{bot}}^{s_k^{top}}  dp
 +\nabla \cdot \left( \int_{s_k^{bot}}^{s_k^{top}}   {\bf u} dp \right)
 + \int_{s_k^{bot}}^{s_k^{top}}\frac{\partial}{\partial z} \left(    w \right) dp
= \int_{s_k^{bot}}^{s_k^{top}} S^h dp
$$ (layer-int-mass-R13App)

tracer:

$$
\frac{\partial }{\partial t} \int_{s_k^{bot}}^{s_k^{top}}  \varphi  dp
 + \nabla \cdot \left( \int_{s_k^{bot}}^{s_k^{top}}  \varphi {\bf u} dp  \right)
 + \int_{s_k^{bot}}^{s_k^{top}} \frac{\partial}{\partial z} \left(   \varphi w \right) dp
= \int_{s_k^{bot}}^{s_k^{top}} \left( D^\varphi + S^\varphi \right) dp
$$ (layer-int-tracer-R13App)

Rewriting the conservation equations in with these layer-averaged variables results in the final layered equations,

$$
\frac{\partial \mathbf{u}_k}{\partial t}
+ q_k\left(h\mathbf{u}_k^{\perp}\right) 
+ \nabla K_k
= 

> - \frac{1}{\rho} \nabla_r p - \nabla_r \phi

Author: Thanks. I agree capital \Phi is for geopotential. I will define that above and add it in more carefully.

+ {\bf D}_k^u + {\bf F}_k^u
$$ (layered-momentum)

$$
\frac{\partial h_k}{\partial t} + \nabla_r \cdot \left(h_k \mathbf{u}_k\right) + \omega_{bot} - \omega_{top}= 0,
$$ (layered-mass)

$$
\frac{\partial h_k \varphi_k}{\partial t} + \nabla_r \cdot \left(h_k \mathbf{u}_k \varphi_k\right) 
+ \varphi\omega_{bot} - \varphi\omega_{top} 
=  D^\varphi_k + S^\varphi_k 
$$ (layered-tracer)

> <!--

Reviewer 6: Again, let's please remove commented-out stuff for ease of reveiw.

Author: done.

Boussinesq:

$$
h^{Bous}(x,y,t) = s_k^{top}(x,y,t) - s_k^{bot}(x,y,t)
$$ (h_def-R13App)

$$
\bar{\bf u}^z(x,y,t) = \frac{1}{h^{Bous}}\int_{s_k^{bot}}^{s_k^{top}} {\bf u}(x,y,z,t) dp
$$ (vert_avg_defu-R13App)

$$
\bar {\varphi}^z(x,y,t) = \frac{1}{h^{Bous}}\int_{s_k^{bot}}^{s_k^{top}} \varphi(x,y,z,t) dp
$$ (vert_avg_def-R13App)

For non-Boussinesq primitive equations, the density remains a full variable and remains in the equations. A simple way to write analagous equations is to define $h$ as a mass-weighted thickness:

non-Boussinesq:

$$
h_k \equiv h(x,y,t) = \rho(x,y,t) \left( s_k^{top}(x,y,t) - s_k^{bot}(x,y,t) \right)
$$ (h_def-non-Bouss)

$$
{\bf u}_k \equiv \bar{\bf u}^z(x,y,t) = \frac{1}{h}\int_{s_k^{bot}}^{s_k^{top}} \rho(x,y,t) {\bf u}(x,y,z,t) dp
$$ (vert_avg_defu-non-Bouss)

$$
{\varphi}_k \equiv \bar{\varphi}^z(x,y,t) = \frac{1}{h}\int_{s_k^{bot}}^{s_k^{top}} \rho(x,y,t) \varphi(x,y,z,t) dp
$$ (vert_avg_def-non-Bouss)

next, explain the vertical terms.

> <!--

Reviewer 6: Same here.

Author: done.

Further details of these derivations are given in [Thuburn et al. 2009](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021999109004434) and [Ringler et al. 2010](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021999109006780) eqns. (2) and (7), and [Bishnu et al. 2024](https://doi.org/10.1029/2022MS003545), Section 2.1.
Additional information on governing equations may be found in chapter 8 of the MPAS User's Guide ([Petersen et al. 2024](https://zenodo.org/records/11098080)).
Publications that evaluate TRiSK against alternative formulations include [Weller et al. 2012](http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/10.1175/MWR-D-11-00193.1), 
[Thuburn and Cotter 2012](https://epubs.siam.org/doi/10.1137/110850293), 
[Calandrini et al. 2021](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S146350032100161X) and 
[Lapolli et al. 2024](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1463500324000222). 
--->

### Discrete Equations

The discretized versions of the governing equations are

$$
\frac{\partial u_e}{\partial t} + \left[ \frac{{\mathbf k} \cdot \nabla \times u_e +f_v}{[h_i]_v}\right]_e\left([h_i]_e u_e^{\perp}\right)

> = -g\nabla(h_i-b_i) - \nabla K_i + \nu_2 \nabla^2 u_e - \nu_4 \nabla^4 u_e + \mathcal{D}_e + \mathcal{F}_e

Reviewer 6: I think we want to keep things general `g` --> `\nabla \phi`.

Author: Thanks. Done.

= 0
$$ (continuous-tracer)

momentum:

$$
&\frac{d}{dt} \int_{V(t)} \rho({\bf x},t)\,  {\bf v}({\bf x},t) \, dV
+ \int_{\partial V(t)}\rho({\bf x},t)\, {\bf v}({\bf x},t) \left({\bf v}({\bf x},t) - {\bf v}_r \right) \cdot {\bf n} \, dA
\\ & \; \; \; =
\int_{V(t)} \rho({\bf x},t) \, {\bf g}\, dV
+ \int_{\partial V(t)} {\bf f}({\bf n},{\bf x},t)  \, dA
$$ (continuous-momentum)

These equations are taken from [Kundu et al. 2016](https://www.amazon.com/dp/012405935X/) (4.5) for mass conservation and (4.17) for momentum conservation.
All notation is identical to Kundu, except that we use ${\bf v}$ for the three-dimensional velocity (${\bf u}$ will be used below for horizontal velocities) and ${\bf v}_r$ and $\partial V$ match the notation in [Ringler et al. 2013](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1463500313000760) Appendix A.2.

The tracer equation is simply mass conservation, where the conserved quantity is the tracer mass $\rho \varphi$, as $\varphi$ is the tracer concentration per unit mass.
In all three equations, the first term is the change of mass within the control volume; the second term is the flux through the moving boundary.

> Kundu uses the star superscripts on the control volume and surface to indicate that it can move in an arbitrary fashion, rather than with the fluid. In that case ${\bf v}_A={\bf v}$ and the second term is zero.

Author: done, thanks.

All notation is identical to Kundu, except that we use ${\bf v}$ for the three-dimensional velocity (${\bf u}$ will be used below for horizontal velocities) and ${\bf v}_r$ and $\partial V$ match the notation in [Ringler et al. 2013](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1463500313000760) Appendix A.2.

The tracer equation is simply mass conservation, where the conserved quantity is the tracer mass $\rho \varphi$, as $\varphi$ is the tracer concentration per unit mass.
In all three equations, the first term is the change of the quantity within the control volume; the second term is the flux through the moving boundary.
If the control surface moves with the fluid in a Lagrangian fashion, then ${\bf v}_r={\bf v}$ and the second term is zero.

The momentum equation  is an expression of Newton's second law and has two additional terms on the right hand side.
The first additional term is the body force, $\rho {\bf g} dV$, where ${\bf g}$ may be expressed as the gradient of a potential ${\bf g}= - \nabla_{3D} \Phi$ for conservative body forces.
Note ${\bf g}$ is general here and not yet Earth's gravity.

> Body forces also include forces from a rotating frame of reference, such as the Coriolis force.

Reviewer 5: Should we include a general body force term that is not gravity then?

Reviewer 6: Yes, I think that makes more sense (and speaks for not calling it `g`, then).

 + \int_{A}\left[ \rho\, w \left(w - w_r \right) \right]_{z=z^{\text{top}}} \, dA
 - \int_{A}\left[ \rho\, w \left(w - w_r \right) \right]_{z=z^{\text{bot}}} \, dA
\\ & \; =
\int_{A} \int_{z^{\text{bot}}}^{z^{\text{top}}} \rho \, g_z \, dz \, dA
+
   \int_{\partial A}\left( \int_{z^{\text{bot}}}^{z^{\text{top}}}\,  f_z \, dz \right) \, dl
 + \int_{A}\left[  f_z \right]_{z=z^{\text{top}}} \, dA
 - \int_{A}\left[  f_z \right]_{z=z^{\text{bot}}} \, dA
$$ (v-momentum)

where the potential gradient vector is ${\bf g} = ({\bf g}_\perp, g_z)$ and the surface forces are ${\bf f} = ({\bf f}_\perp, f_z)$.

The hydrostatic approximation assumes that the first order balance in vertical momentum is between the pressure gradient and buoyancy, and that all other terms are negligible (advection, dissipation, and other forces).
Applying this assumption to [](#v-momentum),

$$
\int_{A} \int_{z^{\text{bot}}}^{z^{\text{top}}} \rho \, g_z \, dz \, dA
 + \int_{A}\left[  f_z \right]_{z=z^{\text{top}}} \, dA
 - \int_{A}\left[  f_z \right]_{z=z^{\text{bot}}} \, dA
 = 0 \\
\int_{A} \int_{z^{\text{bot}}}^{z^{\text{top}}} \rho \, g \, dz \, dA
 + \int_{A}\left[  p \right]_{z=z^{\text{top}}} \, dA

>  - \int_{A}\left[  p \right]_{z=z^{\text{bot}}} \, dA

Reviewer 4: @xylar, this equation is in the pure z direction though (and not a tilted coordinate), so I'm not sure there is a horizontal component here.

>  - \int_{A}\left[  p \right]_{z=z^{\text{bot}}} \, dA

Reviewer 5: I think my confusion with the text is related. Since `v_r = [u_r, w_r]` and `u_r` is perpendicular to the sides, doesn't that imply that `w_r` is parallel to the sides and not necessarily normal to the top and bottom surfaces? In equation vh-mass, have we already built in the assumption of horizontal `z_top` and `z_bot` surfaces in that the only flux of mass through those interfaces is via `(w - w_r)`?

>  - \int_{A}\left[  p \right]_{z=z^{\text{bot}}} \, dA

Reviewer 6: @cbegeman, I completely agree with this as well.

In general, I think the issue is that the finite volume framework necessarily means that it no longer makes sense to first derive the equations a z coordinate and then transform to arbitrary layers.  Instead, we have to include metric terms accounting for the tilt of the layer interfaces as part of the derivation of the layered equations.

>  - \int_{A}\left[  p \right]_{z=z^{\text{bot}}} \, dA

Reviewer 6: I went through the math and there should be no metric term here.  If the surface is sloped, there is a metric term from the normal vector and also a metric term from the dA term, and the 2 cancel out (the normal is shorter in the z direction but the area is larger such that the product is the same).  I have added a note on this in my proposed revisions but the equations are (thankfully) unaffected.

$$ (def-thickness)

In Omega we will use the pseudo-thickness,

$$
{\tilde h}_k(x,y,t) = \int_{{\tilde z}_{k+1}^{\text{top}}}^{{\tilde z}_k^{\text{top}}} d{\tilde z}
= \frac{1}{\rho_0} \int_{z_{k+1}^{\text{top}}}^{z_k^{\text{top}}} \rho dz,
$$ (def-pseudo-thickness)

which is the mass per unit area in the layer, normalized by $\rho_0$. The density-weighted average of any variable $\phi({\bf x},t)$ in layer $k$ is

$$
{\overline \phi}^{\tilde{z}}_k(x,y,t) = 
\frac{\int_{z_{k+1}^{\text{top}}}^{z_k^{\text{top}}} \rho \phi dz}
     {\int_{z_{k+1}^{\text{top}}}^{z_k^{\text{top}}} \rho dz}
     =
\frac{\frac{1}{\rho_0}\int_{z_{k+1}^{\text{top}}}^{z_k^{\text{top}}} \rho \phi dz}
     {\frac{1}{\rho_0}\int_{z_{k+1}^{\text{top}}}^{z_k^{\text{top}}} \rho dz}
     =
\frac{\int_{{\tilde z}_{k+1}^{\text{top}}}^{{\tilde z}_k^{\text{top}}} \phi d{\tilde z}}
     {\int_{{\tilde z}_{k+1}^{\text{top}}}^{{\tilde z}_k^{\text{top}}} d{\tilde z}}
=
\frac{1}{{\tilde h}_k}\int_{{\tilde z}_{k+1}^{\text{top}}}^{{\tilde z}_k^{\text{top}}} \phi d{\tilde z}.
$$ (def-layer-average)

Rearranging, is it useful to note that

$$
\frac{1}{\rho_0}\int_{z_{k+1}^{\text{top}}}^{z_k^{\text{top}}} \rho \phi dz
 = 

> {\tilde h}_k {\overline \phi}^{\tilde{z}}_k(x,y,t).

Reviewer 5: Is this the first use of \overline? If so, define (vertical average in layer?)

Reviewer 6: I think the previous equation is the first use.  I think the meaning is stated there:

> The density-weighted average of any variable $\phi({\bf x},t)$ in layer $k$ is:

Did you feel further clarification is needed?

$$ (h-phi)

### Layered Tracer & Mass 

Dividing the tracer equation [](#vh-tracer) for layer $k$ by the normalization constant $\rho_0$, and substituting [](#def-pseudo-velocity) and [](#h-phi), we have

$$
\frac{d}{dt} \int_{A} {\tilde h}_k {\overline \varphi}^{\tilde{z}}_k  \, dA

> +

Reviewer 4: @xylar, mentions this below, but the $\frac{d}{dt}$'s should be clarified throughout. Since $A$ isn't time dependent, $\frac{d}{dt}\int_A f dA = \int_A\frac{\partial f}{\partial t} dA$

It is a pseudo-transport velocity in units of m/s. 
Equation [](#layer-tracer-pre) is identical to [Ringler et al. 2013](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1463500313000760) (A.24), and further explanation can be found in that appendix.

As a final step, we substitute the approximation $\overline{\varphi {\bf u}}^{\tilde{z}}_k \approx \overline{\varphi }^{\tilde{z}}_k \overline{{\bf u}}^{\tilde{z}}_k$. 
The mass equation is identical to the tracer equation with $\varphi=1$. Dropping the overlines for simpler notation, the layered version of mass and tracer conservation are

mass:

$$
\frac{d{\tilde h}_k }{dt} 
+
   \nabla \cdot \left({\tilde h}_k{\bf u}_k \right) 
 + \left[ {\tilde w}_{tr} \right]_{{\tilde z}={\tilde z}_k^{\text{top}}} 
 - \left[ {\tilde w}_{tr} \right]_{{\tilde z}={\tilde z}_{k+1}^{\text{bot}}}
= 0
$$ (layer-mass)

tracer:

$$
\frac{d{\tilde h}_k \varphi_k  }{dt} 
+
   \nabla \cdot \left({\tilde h}_k \varphi_k {\bf u}_k \right) 
 + \left[ \varphi {\tilde w}_{tr} \right]_{{\tilde z}={\tilde z}_k^{\text{top}}} 
 - \left[ \varphi {\tilde w}_{tr} \right]_{{\tilde z}={\tilde z}_{k+1}^{\text{bot}}}
= 0
$$ (layer-tracer)

> ### Layered Momentum

Reviewer 6: If we want to go back to 3D, we should explain why and that we're only going to keep the horizontal components in the end.

$$ (momentum-Ftotal)

Each term on the right-hand side corresponds to a physically distinct force acting on the fluid within the control volume:

- The first term is the **Coriolis force**, where $ \mathbf{f} $ is the vector Coriolis parameter (e.g., $ f \hat{\mathbf{z}} $ on the sphere).
- The second term represents the **gravitational force**, expressed in terms of the gradient of the gravitational potential $ \Phi(x, y, z, t) $, which may include effects such as tides and self-attraction and loading.
- The third term is the **pressure force**, which acts on the boundary surfaces and is naturally expressed as a surface integral. It gives rise to both horizontal pressure gradients and contributions from sloping surfaces.
- The fourth term represents the surface stresses. They include **horizontal stress forces** across the vertical sides of the control volume, such as those due to lateral friction or subgrid momentum transfer.
They also include **vertical stress forces** (e.g., wind stress at the ocean surface and bottom drag at the seafloor), projected into horizontal momentum and acting across the top and bottom surfaces.

#### Pressure Term

> The pressure force term may be converted from the boundary to the interior with Gauss' divergence theorem (see [Kundu et al. 2016](https://www.amazon.com/dp/012405935X/) p. 119),

Reviewer 6: First, please use the official DOI (from Springer/Nature) for the book and not the Amazon link.  Amazon doesn't need our help with advertizing...

Second, let's clarify this:
```suggestion
The pressure force term, expressed as a surface integral, can be converted to a volume integral using Gauss’ divergence theorem (see [Kundu et al. 2016](https://doi.org/10.1016/C2012-0-00611-4) p. 119),
```

$$
- \int_{\partial V(t)} p \, \mathbf{n} \, dA 
= - \int_{V(t)} \nabla_{3D} p \, dV .
$$ (gradp-Gauss)

Considering only the horizontal components, we have

$$
 - \int_{V(t)} \nabla_{\perp} p \, dV
= - \int_{A} \int_{z^{\text{bot}}}^{z^{\text{top}}} 
  \nabla_{\perp} p \, dz \, dA

> = - \int_{A}   \overline{\nabla_{\perp} p}^{z}  \, dA.

Reviewer 6: There is simply no way to simplify this term further without making approximations that we are not yet ready to make.

$$ (gradp-h)

> #### Stress Term

Reviewer 6: This section also uses the $\overline{X}^{z}$ notation and should instead use $\overline{1/\rho X}^{\tilde{z}}$ in all cases, just like the pressure gradient term.

Reviewer 6: However, I also suspect that @vanroekel will argue that there are no resolved stresses on the horizontal boundaries so the only terms we need to retain are the sub-grid-scale ones.

Likewise, the stress tensor integrated over the surface may be converted to a volume integral with Gauss' theorem ([Kundu et al. 2016](https://www.amazon.com/dp/012405935X/) p. 125 eqn 4.20b),

$$
\int_{\partial V(t)} \boldsymbol{\tau} \cdot \mathbf{n} \, dA
= \int_{V(t)} \nabla_{3D} \cdot \boldsymbol{\tau} \, dV
$$ (stress-Gauss)

for clarity, this can be written in index notation as

$$
\int_{\partial V(t)} n_i \tau_{ij} \, dA
= \int_{V(t)} \frac{\partial}{\partial x_i} \left( \tau_{ij} \right) \, dV
$$ (stress-Gauss-index)

Taking only the horizontal ($j$=1,2),

$$
 \int_{V(t)} \frac{\partial}{\partial x_i} \left( \tau_{ij} \right) \, dV
= \int_{A} \int_{z^{\text{bot}}}^{z^{\text{top}}} 
 \frac{\partial}{\partial x_i} \left( \tau_{ij} \right) 
\, dz \, dA
=  \int_{A} 
  \overline{
 \frac{\partial}{\partial x_i} \left( \tau_{ij} \right) }^z dA
$$ (gradp-h)

> #### Horizontal momentum

Reviewer 6: The top/bot vs. k and k+1 notation in this section is messy and needs a little cleaning up.  Let's stick with `top`, k and k+1 to be consistent with the previous notation change.

 - \int_{A} \int_{z^{\text{bot}}}^{z^{\text{top}}} 
  \nabla_{\perp} p \, dz \, dA
+ \int_{A} \int_{z^{\text{bot}}}^{z^{\text{top}}} 
 \frac{\partial}{\partial x_i} \left( \tau_{ij} \right) 
\, dz \, dA.
$$ (h-momentum-p-tau)

Dividing by $\rho_0$ and taking vertical averages using [](#def-thickness) and [](#def-pseudo-thickness),

$$
\frac{d}{dt} \int_{A} \tilde{h}\, \overline{  {\bf u} }^{\tilde z} \, dA
+
   \int_{A}\nabla_\perp \cdot \left( \tilde{h}\, \overline{{\bf u} \otimes {\bf u} }^{\tilde z} \right) dA
& + \int_{A}\left[ {\bf u}\, \tilde{w}_{tr} \right]_{z=z^{\text{top}}} \, dA
 - \int_{A}\left[ {\bf u}\, \tilde{w}_{tr} \right]_{z=z^{\text{bot}}} \, dA
\\ & \; =
- \int_{A} \tilde{h} \,\overline{  \mathbf{f} \times \mathbf{u} }^{\tilde z} \, dA
- \int_{A} \tilde{h} \,\overline{  \nabla_\perp \Phi }^{\tilde z} \, dA
- \int_{A} \frac{1}{\rho_0} \overline{\nabla_{\perp} p}^{z}  \, dA
+ \int_{A} \frac{1}{\rho_0} \overline{ \frac{\partial}{\partial x_i} \left( \tau_{ij} \right) }^z dA
$$ (h-momentum-p-tau)

Taking the limit as $A \rightarrow 0$, we arrive at the local, horizontally continuous form:

$$

> \frac{\partial \tilde{h}\, \overline{  {\bf u} }^{\tilde z} }{\partial t} 

Reviewer 6: I think we need to clarify why $d/dt$ becomes $\partial/\partial t$ here.

Reviewer: @xylar I'm confused by the d/dt vs \partial / \partial t throughout, especially when D/Dt is introduced later for the material derivative.  Should we really have ordinary derivatives here?  I feel like I'm missing an important, obvious point.

Reviewer 6: My understanding (though this isn't explicitly stated) is that $d/dt$ follows the control volume (which can move in the vertical), $\partial/\partial t$ is in the Eulerian frame and $D/Dt$ follows a fluid parcel.

Reviewer: Thanks @xylar I appreciate that clarification.  I'll fix this in the version I'm working on as I confused the two forms (reynolds transport and eulerian)

& +
   \nabla_\perp \cdot \left( \tilde{h}\, \overline{{\bf u} \otimes {\bf u} }^{\tilde z} \right) 
 + \left[ {\bf u}\, \tilde{w}_{tr} \right]_{z=z^{\text{top}}} 
 - \left[ {\bf u}\, \tilde{w}_{tr} \right]_{z=z^{\text{bot}}} 
\\ & =
-  \tilde{h} \,\overline{  \mathbf{f} \times \mathbf{u} }^{\tilde z} 
-  \tilde{h} \,\overline{  \nabla_\perp \Phi }^{\tilde z} 
-  \frac{1}{\rho_0} \overline{\nabla_{\perp} p}^{z}  
+  \frac{1}{\rho_0} \overline{ \frac{\partial}{\partial x_i} \left( \tau_{ij} \right) }^z 
$$ (momentum-layered-differential-1)

The first two terms are the material derivative, confined within the horizontal layer. Using the product rule, and layered mass conservation [](#layer-mass),

$$
\frac{\partial \tilde{h}\, \overline{  {\bf u} }^{\tilde z} }{\partial t} 
+ \nabla_\perp \cdot \left( \tilde{h}\, \overline{{\bf u} \otimes {\bf u} }^{\tilde z} \right) 
&= 
\frac{D_\perp \tilde{h}\, \overline{  {\bf u} }^{\tilde z} }{D t} \\
&=
\tilde{h}\frac{D_\perp  \overline{  {\bf u} }^{\tilde z} }{D t} 
+

> \overline{ {\bf u} }^{\tilde z} \frac{D_\perp \tilde{h}}{D t} \\

Reviewer 6: The right-hand side seems to be missing the vertical velocity terms to make it the full material derivative.

&= 
\tilde{h}\left(
  \frac{\partial  \overline{  {\bf u} }^{\tilde z} }{\partial t} 
+ \nabla_\perp \cdot \left( \overline{{\bf u} \otimes {\bf u} }^{\tilde z} \right)  \right)
- \overline{ {\bf u} }^{\tilde z} \left( 
   \left[ {\tilde w}_{tr} \right]_{{\tilde z}={\tilde z}_k^{\text{top}}} 
 - \left[ {\tilde w}_{tr} \right]_{{\tilde z}={\tilde z}_{k+1}^{\text{bot}}}
\right) 
$$ (2D-material-der-product)

We now substitute [](#2D-material-der-product) into [](#momentum-layered-differential-1) and divide by $\tilde h$ to get

$$
 \frac{\partial \overline{  {\bf u} }^{\tilde z} }{\partial t} 
+ \nabla_\perp \cdot \left(  \overline{{\bf u} \otimes {\bf u} }^{\tilde z} \right) 
& + \frac{\left[ {\bf u}\, \tilde{w}_{tr} \right]_{z=z^{\text{top}}} 
 - \left[ {\bf u}\, \tilde{w}_{tr} \right]_{z=z^{\text{bot}}} }{\tilde h}
-   \frac{\overline{ {\bf u} }^{\tilde z}}{\tilde{h}}  \left( 
   \left[ {\tilde w}_{tr} \right]_{{\tilde z}={\tilde z}_k^{\text{top}}} 

>  - \left[ {\tilde w}_{tr} \right]_{{\tilde z}={\tilde z}_{k+1}^{\text{bot}}}\right)

Reviewer 6: We need a sentence to explain these vertical transport terms, something like:
“These terms represent the net vertical transport of horizontal momentum across the layer boundaries and vanish when horizontal velocity is vertically uniform."

$$ (momentum-layered-differential-2)

Note that the coefficient of the pressure gradient and stress tensor can be rewritten as

$$
\frac{1}{\rho_0 \, \tilde{h}} = 
\frac{1}{\rho_0 \,\frac{1}{\rho_0} \int_{z_{k+1}^{\text{top}}}^{z_k^{\text{top}}} \rho dz}
= \frac{1} {\overline{\rho}^z}
= \overline{\alpha}^z,
$$ (grad-p-coeff)

where $\alpha$ is the specific volume. 
Gathering the vertical advection terms, [](#momentum-layered-differential-2) becomes

$$
 \frac{\partial \overline{  {\bf u} }^{\tilde z} }{\partial t} 
 + \nabla_\perp \cdot \left(  \overline{{\bf u} \otimes {\bf u} }^{\tilde z} \right) 
& 
+ \left( \nabla_\perp \cdot  {\bf u}  \right) {\bf u}
+ \frac{1}{\tilde h}\left(
 \left[ {\bf u}\right]_{z=z^{\text{top}}}-\overline{ {\bf u} }^{\tilde z}\right) \, \left[\tilde{w}_{tr} \right]_{z=z^{\text{top}}} 
 - 
  \frac{1}{\tilde h}\left(
 \left[ {\bf u}\right]_{z=z^{\text{bot}}}-\overline{ {\bf u} }^{\tilde z}\right) \, \left[\tilde{w}_{tr} \right]_{z=z^{\text{bot}}} 
\\ &  =
-  \overline{  \mathbf{f} \times \mathbf{u} }^{\tilde z} 
-  \overline{  \nabla_\perp \Phi }^{\tilde z} 

> -  \overline{\alpha}^z \overline{\nabla_{\perp} p}^{z}  

Reviewer 6: We do not want to make simplifying assumptions about the pressure gradient at this time and instead need to keep the full notation as it was:
```suggestion
-  \overline{\alpha \nabla_{\perp} p}^{\tilde{z}}
```

&= \zeta {\bf u}^{\perp} + \nabla_\perp K,
\end{aligned}
$$ (advection-identity)

where $\zeta$ is relative vorticity and $K$ is kinetic energy.
This step separates the horizontal advection into non-divergent and non-rotational components, which is useful in the final TRiSK formulation. 

Now [](#momentum-layered-differential-3) becomes

$$
 \frac{\partial \overline{  {\bf u} }^{\tilde z} }{\partial t} 
 +
   \left(  \zeta + f  \right) {\overline{  {\bf u} }^{\tilde z}}^\perp
& 
+ \left( \nabla_\perp \cdot  {\bf u}  \right) {\bf u}
+ \frac{1}{\tilde h}\left(
 \left[ {\bf u}\right]_{z=z^{\text{top}}}-\overline{ {\bf u} }^{\tilde z}\right) \, \left[\tilde{w}_{tr} \right]_{z=z^{\text{top}}} 
 - 
  \frac{1}{\tilde h}\left(
 \left[ {\bf u}\right]_{z=z^{\text{bot}}}-\overline{ {\bf u} }^{\tilde z}\right) \, \left[\tilde{w}_{tr} \right]_{z=z^{\text{bot}}} 
\\ &  =
- \nabla_\perp K 
-  \overline{  \nabla_\perp \Phi }^{\tilde z} 
-  \overline{\alpha}^z \overline{\nabla_{\perp} p}^{z}  
+  \overline{\alpha}^z \overline{ \frac{\partial}{\partial x_i} \left( \tau_{ij} \right) }^z 
$$ (momentum-layered-differential-4)

Notes from Mark:

> 1. I don't know what to do with the z-average in the advection term of [](#momentum-layered-differential-2) and here. In the mean time, I'll just skip to the layer-averaged terms.

Reviewer 6: These need to be $\tilde{z}$ averages that keep the $1/\rho = \alpha$ inside the overbar, as I have indicated above.  For now, we don't want to simply further.

> 2. I don't know what to make of the $\left( \nabla_\perp \cdot  {\bf u}  \right) {\bf u}$ term, and whether it cancels with some of those odd vertical transport terms. 

Reviewer 6: Don't you get a clean $u \cdot \nabla u$ when you combine your 2 renaming terms?

- **Omega-1.1: Layered ocean, idealized, with surface fluxes.** Addition of simple vertical mixing scheme such as Pacanowski & Philander; nonlinear equation of state (TEOS10); tracer surface restoring to a constant field; constant wind forcing; and flux-corrected transport for horizontal advection. Testing will be with the baroclinic gyre and single column tests of surface fluxes and vertical mixing. 
- **Omega-2.0: Coupled within E3SM, ocean only.** Ability to run C cases (active ocean only) within E3SM. Requires addition of E3SM coupling infrastructure; simple analysis (time-averaged output of mean, min, max); split baroclinic-barotropic time; global bounds checking on state. Testing and analysis similar to [Ringler et al. 2013](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1463500313000760), except Omega uses a non-Boussinesq formulation.

> - **Omega-2.1: E3SM fully coupled** Ability to run G cases (active ocean and sea ice) and B cases (all components active) within E3SM. This will include: a full vertical mixing scheme, such as KPP; frazil ice formation in the ocean; and a submosescale parameterization. Parameterizations mean for lower resolutions, such as Gent-McWilliams and Redi mixing, will not be in this version. Simulations can be run at high resolution and compared to previous E3SM simulations, including [Petersen et al. 2019](https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/2018MS001373) and [Caldwell et al. 2019](https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2019MS001870).

Reviewer: Parameterizations mean -> Parameterizations meant

may be easier to say Omega 2.1 will be mostly eddy resolving only, e.g. No Gent-McWilliams or Redi mixing parameterizations

Author: done.

+ \frac{1}{2}\nabla \left| {\mathbf u}_k \right|^2
+ ( {\mathbf k} \cdot \nabla \times {\mathbf u}_k) {\mathbf u}^\perp_k
+ f{\mathbf u}^{\perp}_k
+ w_k^{bot}{\mathbf u}_k^{bot}
- w_k^{top}{\mathbf u}_k^{top} =
- \frac{1}{\rho_0}\nabla p_k 
- \frac{\rho g}{\rho_0}\nabla z^{mid}_k
+ \nu_h\nabla^2{\mathbf u}_k
+ \frac{\partial }{\partial z} \left( \nu_v \frac{\partial {\mathbf u}_k}{\partial z} \right),
$$ (mpaso-continuous-momentum)

$$
\frac{\partial h_k}{\partial t} + \nabla \cdot \left( h_k^e {\mathbf u}_k \right) + w_k^{bot} - w_k^{top} = 0,
$$ (mpaso-continuous-thickness)

$$
\frac{\partial h_k\varphi_k}{\partial t} + \nabla \cdot \left( h_k^e\varphi_k^e {\mathbf u}_k \right) 
+ \varphi_k^{bot} w_k^{bot} - \varphi_k^{top} w_k^{top}
= \nabla\cdot\left(h_k^e \kappa_h \nabla\varphi_k \right)
+ h_k \frac{\partial }{\partial z} \left( \kappa_v \frac{\partial \varphi_k}{\partial z} \right).
$$ (mpaso-continuous-tracer)

The layer thickness $h$, vertical velocity $w$, pressure $p$, and tracer $\varphi$, are cell-centered quantities, while the horizontal velocity ${\mathbf u}$ and $e$ superscript are variables interpolated to the cell edges.

### Continuous Equations

> The continuous form of the conservation equations are as follows [Kundu et al. 2024](https://www.amazon.com/Fluid-Mechanics-Pijush-K-Kundu/dp/012405935X), chapter 4, eqns 4.7 and 4.22. This is before any assumptions are made, so this is a compressible, non-hydrostatic, non-Boussinesq fluid. Here all variables are a function of $(x,y,z)$, $\bf u$ denotes the horizontal velocity vector, $w$ is the vertical velocity, ${\bf u} \otimes {\bf u} = {\bf u}{\bf u}^T$ is the tensor product, $\nabla$ is the horizontal gradient, and other variables defined in the [section below](#variable-definitions).

Reviewer: can you name the section below -- 'in the variable definition section below'

Author: done.

&= \{\boldsymbol{k} \cdot (\nabla \times \boldsymbol{u})\} \boldsymbol{k} \times \boldsymbol{u} + \nabla \frac{|\boldsymbol{u}|^2}{2} \\
&= \zeta \boldsymbol{u}^{\perp} + \nabla K.
$$ (advection-identity)

where $\zeta$ is relative vorticity and $K$ is kinetic energy. This is used to produce the final formulation below.

For a primitive equation ocean model, we assume the fluid is incompressible and hydrostatic. For Omega we are not making the Boussinesq assumption, so all density terms are the full density. In particular, the density coefficient of the pressure gradient in [](#continuous-momentum-R13App) is not a constant, as it is in primitive equation models like POP and MPAS-Ocean.

**Incompressible:** Assume that the three-dimensional velocity field is nondivergent,

$$
 \nabla \cdot {\bf u} + \frac{\partial w}{\partial z}  = 0.
$$ (continuous-incompressible)

**Hydrostatic:** Beginning with the vertical momentum equation,

$$
\frac{D w }{D t} 
  = 
  - \frac{1}{\rho} \frac{\partial p}{\partial z} - g + {\bf D}^u + {\bf F}^u
$$ (continuous-vert-mom)

> assume that advection of vertical momentum $Dw/Dt$, dissipation, and forcing are small, and that the first order balance is between pressure gradient and gravity,

Reviewer: i feel this is more appropriate to say the balance is between pressure and buoyancy.

Author: done.

$$ (discrete-thickness)

$$
\frac{\partial h_i \varphi_i}{\partial t} + \nabla \cdot \left(u_e [h_i \varphi_i]_e \right) = \kappa_2 h_i \nabla^2 \varphi_i - \kappa_4 h_i \nabla^4 \varphi_i,
$$ (discrete-tracer)

where subscripts $i$, $e$, and $v$ indicate cell, edge, and vertex locations ($i$ was chosen for cell because $c$ and $e$ look similar).  Here square brackets $[\cdot]_e$ and $[\cdot]_v$ are quantities that are interpolated to edge and vertex locations. The interpolation is typically centered, but may vary by method, particularly for advection schemes. For vector quantities, $u_e$ denotes the normal component at the center of the edge, while $u_e^\perp$ denotes the tangential component. In the discrete system, the normal component $u_e$ points positively from the lower cell index to the higher cell index, while the tangential component $u_e^\perp$ points positively $90^o$ to the left of $u_e$ (for unit vectors, ${\mathbf n}_e^\perp = {\mathbf k}\times {\mathbf n}_e$).

The discretized momentum drag and forcing terms are
$$
\mathcal{D}_e = - Ra \, u_e - C_D \frac{u_e\left|u_e\right|}{[h_i]_e}
$$

$$

> \mathcal{F}_e =  C_W \frac{(u_W - u_e)\left|u_W - u_e\right|}{[h_i]_e}

Reviewer: since this comes from the coupler, why not just write as $$tau/(rho*[h_i]_3}$$ -- how will fluxes work?  is this h_i a pressure thickness?  units don't seem to worf if that is the case.

Author: Good point. I updated that and added a [wind forcing section](https://portal.nersc.gov/project/e3sm/mpeterse/omega/design-doc-v1-eqns/_build/html/design/OmegaV1GoverningEqns.html#wind-forcing)

Author: With the new definition of layer mass-thickness $h$, it is simply $\tau/h$.

# Omega V1: Governing Equations

<!--
Add later, if it seems necessary. There is a toc on the left bar.
**Table of Contents**
1. [Overview](#1-overview)
2. [Requirements](#2-requirements)
3. [Algorithmic Formulation](#3-algorithmic-formulation)
4. [Design](#4-design)
5. [Verification and Testing](#5-verification-and-testing)
-->

## 1. Overview

> This design document describes the governing equations for Omega, the Ocean Model for E3SM Global Applications. Overall, Omega is an unstructured-mesh ocean model based on TRiSK numerical methods ([Thuburn et al. 2009](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021999109004434)) that is specifically designed for modern exascale computing architectures. The algorithms in Omega will be mostly identical to those in MPAS-Ocean, but it will be written in c++ rather than Fortran in order to take advantage of libraries to run on GPUs, such as Kokkos ([Trott et al. 2022](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9485033)). Significant differences between MPAS-Ocean and Omega are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This design document describes the governing equations for Omega, the Ocean Model for E3SM Global Applications. Overall, Omega is an unstructured-mesh ocean model based on TRiSK numerical methods ([Thuburn et al. 2009](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021999109004434)) that is specifically designed for modern exascale computing architectures. The algorithms in Omega will be mostly identical to those in MPAS-Ocean, but it will be written in c++ rather than Fortran in order to take advantage of the Kokkos performance portability library to run on GPUs ([Trott et al. 2022](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9485033)). Significant differences between MPAS-Ocean and Omega are:
```

Author: done, thanks.

See additional [EOS design document](EOS)

### Omega-1.0 will add new terms for the pressure gradient, vertical mixing, and vertical advection.
See forthcoming design documents on the pressure gradient, vertical mixing, and vertical advection.

## 3. Continuous Equations

The continuous form of the conservation equations are as follows [Kundu et al. 2024](https://www.amazon.com/Fluid-Mechanics-Pijush-K-Kundu/dp/012405935X), chapter 4, eqns 4.7 and 4.22. This is before any assumptions are made, so this is a compressible, non-hydrostatic, non-Boussinesq fluid. Here all variables are a function of $(x,y,z)$, ${\bf u}_{3D}$ denotes the three-dimensional velocity vector, ${\bf u}_{3D} \otimes {\bf u}_{3D} = {\bf u}_{3D}{\bf u}_{3D}^T$ is the tensor product, $\nabla_{3D}$ is the three-dimensional gradient, $D/Dt$ is the material derivative, and other variables defined in the [Variable Definition Section](#variable-definitions) below.

momentum:

$$
\frac{D \rho {\bf u}_{3D} }{D t} \equiv
\frac{\partial \rho {\bf u}_{3D}}{\partial t}
 + \nabla_{3D} \cdot \left( \rho {\bf u}_{3D} \otimes {\bf u}_{3D}  \right)
  = - \nabla_{3D} p
+ \rho {\bf D}^u + \rho {\bf F}^u

> $$ (continuous-momentum)

Reviewer: the buoyancy term is missing here `rho g khat`

Author: The first equation set is the most general, so gravity is within ${\bf F}^u$. A few paragraphs down I begin "Geophysical fluids such as the ocean and atmosphere are rotating and stratified..." and start to make assumptions and call out specific terms. I have the sentence "The gravitational force $g {\bf k}$ is included in ${\bf F}^u$".

Reviewer: oh sorry, totally missed that.  Thanks for the explanation

mass:

$$
\frac{D \rho}{D t} \equiv
\frac{\partial \rho }{\partial t}
 + \nabla_{3D} \cdot \left( \rho  {\bf u}_{3D}  \right)
= 0
$$ (continuous-mass)

tracers:

$$
\frac{D \rho \varphi }{D t} \equiv
\frac{\partial \rho \varphi}{\partial t}
 + \nabla_{3D} \cdot \left( \rho \varphi {\bf u}_{3D}  \right)
= D^\varphi + Q^\varphi
$$ (continuous-tracer)

Here we have express the following terms as a general operators, with examples of specific forms provided below: the dissipation ${\bf D}^u$, momentum forcing ${\bf F}^u$, tracer diffusion $D^\varphi$, and tracer sources and sinks $Q^\varphi$. The momentum equation can be rewritten using the product rule on $\rho {\bf u}$, mass conservation, and dividing by $\rho$, as:

$$
\frac{D {\bf u}_{3D} }{D t} \equiv
\frac{\partial {\bf u}_{3D}}{\partial t}

>  + \nabla_{3D} \cdot \left( {\bf u}_{3D} \otimes {\bf u}_{3D}  \right)

Author: Thanks! You are right! I changed it to this: 
<img width="662" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/29b97644-ec3f-4093-a03d-fde15bc2c937" />

+ {\bf D}^u + {\bf F}^u
$$ (continuous-momentum-rho)

Geophysical fluids such as the ocean and atmosphere are rotating and stratified, and horizontal velocities are orders of magnitude larger than vertical velocities. It is therefore convenient to separate the horizontal and vertical as ${\bf u}_{3D} = \left( {\bf u}, w \right)$ and $\nabla_{3D} = \left( \nabla_z, d/dz \right)$ where $z$ is the vertical direction in a local coordinate frame on the Earth's surface and $w$ is the vertical velocity. The $z$ subscript on $\nabla_z$ is to remind us that this is the true horizontal gradient (perpendicular to $z$), as opposed to gradients within tilted layers used in the following section. The gravitational force $g {\bf k}$ is added in the vertical. The rotating frame of reference results in the Coriolis force $f {\bf k} \times {\bf u} \equiv f {\bf u}^\perp$, where $f$ is the Coriolis parameter and ${\bf u}^\perp$ is the horizontal velocity rotated $90^o$ from $\bf u$. See any textbook in the [References](#references) for a full derivation.

The horizontal parts of the advective term may be replaced with the vector identity

$$
\nabla_z \cdot \left( {\bf u} \otimes {\bf u}  \right) =

> \boldsymbol{u} \cdot \nabla_z \boldsymbol{u} &= (\nabla_z \times \boldsymbol{u}) \times \boldsymbol{u} + \nabla_z \frac{|\boldsymbol{u}|^2}{2} \\

Author: Thanks, you are right. I changed it to 
<img width="912" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1a18d48d-e657-4782-9d6c-bddfd32e8c95" />

&= \{\boldsymbol{k} \cdot (\nabla_z \times \boldsymbol{u})\} \boldsymbol{k} \times \boldsymbol{u} + \nabla_z \frac{|\boldsymbol{u}|^2}{2} \\
&= \zeta \boldsymbol{u}^{\perp} + \nabla_z K.

> $$ (advection-identity)

Reviewer: to get this set above to render in visual studio I needed this form 
```
$$
\begin{aligned}
\nabla_z \cdot \left( {\bf u} \otimes {\bf u}  \right) &=
\boldsymbol{u} \cdot \nabla_z \boldsymbol{u} \\
&= (\nabla_z \times \boldsymbol{u}) \times \boldsymbol{u} + \nabla_z \frac{|\boldsymbol{u}|^2}{2} \\
&= \{\boldsymbol{k} \cdot (\nabla_z \times \boldsymbol{u})\} \boldsymbol{k} \times \boldsymbol{u} + \nabla_z \frac{|\boldsymbol{u}|^2}{2} \\
&= \zeta \boldsymbol{u}^{\perp} + \nabla_z K.
\end{aligned}
$$ (advection-identity)
```

Author: Thanks! I didn't know that.

**Incompressible:** Assume that the three-dimensional velocity field is nondivergent,

$$
 \nabla_z \cdot {\bf u} + \frac{\partial w}{\partial z}  = 0.
$$ (continuous-incompressible)

**Hydrostatic:** Beginning with the vertical momentum equation,

$$
\frac{D w }{D t}
  =
  - \frac{1}{\rho} \frac{\partial p}{\partial z} - g + {\bf D}^u + {\bf F}^u
$$ (continuous-vert-mom)

assume that advection of vertical momentum $Dw/Dt$, dissipation, and forcing are small, and that the first order balance is between pressure gradient and buoyancy,

$$
\frac{\partial p}{\partial z}
  = - \rho g.
$$ (hydrostatic-balance)
We then integrate from $z$ to the surface $z^{surf}$ to obtain the hydrostatic pressure equation,

$$
p(x,y,z) = p^{surf}(x,y) + \int_{z}^{z^{surf}} \rho g dz'.
$$ (continuous-hydrostatic-pressure)

The constitutive equation is the equation of state,

$$
\rho = f_{eos}(p,\Theta,S).
$$ (continuous-eos)

> where conservative temperature, $\Theta$, and salinity, $S$, are examples of tracers $\varphi$.

Author: Is there a need to work with other types of salinity? If not, I would prefer to just use $S$ for absolute salinity, rather than $S_A$. Likewise, we work with conservative rather than potential temperature, and conservative temperature simply uses $\Theta$.

#### Final Continuous Equations

> The final form of the continuous conservation equations for a non-Boussinesq, incompressible, non-hydrostatic ocean are

Author: done! Too many nons!

$$ (def-p-surf)

where $z^{surf}$ is the sea surface height and $p^{surf}$ is the surface pressure at $z^{surf}$ imposed by the atmosphere or floating ice. Note that pressure increases with depth.  This means that positive $p$ points downward, so that the $top$ and $bot$ extents of the integration limits are flipped in [](#depth-pressure-integral-conversion).

For any three-dimensional quantity $\varphi(x,y,z,t)$, the mass-thickness-averaged quantity in layer $k$ is defined as

$$
\varphi_k(x,y,t)
\equiv \frac{\int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}} \rho \varphi dz}{\int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}} \rho dz}
= \frac{\int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}} \rho \varphi dz}{h_k}
$$(def-mass-thickness-average)

At this point our derivation has not made any assumptions about density, and may be used for both Boussinesq and non-Boussinesq fluids. A Boussinesq derivation would now assume small variations in density and replace $\rho(x,y,z,t)$ with a constant $\rho_0$ everywhere but the pressure gradient coefficient. In that case $\rho$ divides out in [](#def-mass-thickness-average) the Boussinesq layer quantities would simply be thickness-weighted averages.

> We can now derive the layered equations. Writing the momentum equation [](continuous-momentum-final) with $\rho$ included as in [](continuous-momentum), we integrate the continuous equations [](continuous-momentum-final), [](continuous-mass-final), [](continuous-tracer-final) in $z$ from $z_k^{bot}$ to $z_k^{top}$,

Author: It is easiest to [view here](https://portal.nersc.gov/project/e3sm/mpeterse/omega/design-doc-v1-eqns/_build/html/design/OmegaV1GoverningEqns.html), which I compiled with make html on perlmutter.

$$
\frac{\partial }{\partial t} \int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}} \rho{\bf u} dz
+  \int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}} \rho \left( \zeta + f \right){\bf u}^\perp dz
+  \int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}} \frac{\partial }{\partial z} \left( \rho w{\bf u} \right) dz
  =  \int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}} \rho \left[- \frac{1}{\rho}\nabla_z p - \nabla_z K
+ {\bf D}^u + {\bf F}^u \right] dz

> $$ (z-integration-momentum)

Author: Thanks. That must mean that momentum variables are simply layer-averages, not density-weighted layer averages. That would also answer my question about why the layered momentum equation is not weighted by h.

> $$ (z-integration-momentum)

Author: Now I see that the rho in the vertical advection terms did not make sense anyway. The units don't match.
<img width="522" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/41911fcc-ecb3-42ef-8659-4b9f011511e9" />. So I need to alter that throughout.

> $$ (z-integration-momentum)

Author: I updated the vertical advection momentum terms to be $v\omega$ i.e. specific volume * vertical mass transport.

$$
\frac{\partial {\bf u}_k}{\partial t}
+ \zeta_k {\bf u}_k^{\perp}
+ f {\bf u}_k^{\perp}
+ \left[ \rho_k  w_k {\bf u}_k \right]^{top} - \left[ \rho_k w_k {\bf u}_k \right]^{bot}
=
- \frac{1}{\rho} \nabla_z p_k
- \nabla_z K_k
+ {\bf D}_k^u + {\bf F}_k^u
$$ (layered-momentum-1)

$$
\frac{\partial h_k}{\partial t} + \nabla_z \cdot \left(h_k {\bf u}_k\right) + \left[ \rho_k w_k \right]^{top} - \left[ \rho_k w_k \right]^{bot}= Q^h_k
$$ (layered-mass-1)

$$
\frac{\partial h_k \varphi_k}{\partial t} + \nabla_z \cdot \left(h_k {\bf u}_k \varphi_k\right)
+ \left[ \varphi_k \rho_k w_k \right]^{top} - \left[ \varphi_k \rho_k w_k \right]^{bot}
=  D^\varphi_k + Q^\varphi_k.
$$ (layered-tracer-1)

Equivalently, one could have multiplied  [](z-integration-momentum), [](z-integration-mass), [](z-integration-tracers) by $g$ and expressed the integrals in terms of pressure, with integration limits from $p_k^{top}$ to $p_k^{bot}$.

> Derivations of ocean model equations with pressure as the vertical variable may be found in de Szoeke and Samelson 2002 (link: `https://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/full/10.1175/1520-0485(2002)032%3C2194%3ATDBTBA%3E2.0.CO%3B2`)  and [Losch et al. 2003](https://journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/phoc/34/1/1520-0485_2004_034_0306_hsacgc_2.0.co_2.xml).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Derivations of ocean model equations with pressure as the vertical variable may be found in [de Szoeke and Samelson 2002](https://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/full/10.1175/1520-0485(2002)032%3C2194%3ATDBTBA%3E2.0.CO%3B2)  and [Losch et al. 2003](https://journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/phoc/34/1/1520-0485_2004_034_0306_hsacgc_2.0.co_2.xml).

```

Author: Never mind. I found an alternate link without parentheses.

The vertical advection terms use the fundamental theorem of calculus to integrate a derivative in $z$, resulting in boundary conditions at the layer interfaces. This makes intuitive sense as a mass balance. For example, in the absence of horizontal advection and sources, the mass equation is simply

$$
\frac{\partial h_k}{\partial t}
= \left[ \rho_k w_k \right]^{bot} - \left[ \rho_k w_k \right]^{top}.
$$ (layered-mass-vert-adv)

This states that the change in mass in the layer is the incoming mass from below minus the outgoing mass above, since the vertical velocity $w$ is positive upwards. The vertical advection of momentum and tracers have a similar interpretation.

### Questions

1. How do integrals in  [](#z-integration-momentum) to [](#z-integration-tracers) turn into the layered form [](layered-momentum-1) to [](layered-tracer-1) when there are products in the terms? For example, $\zeta_k {\bf u}^\perp_k$, $\nabla K$ and $\rho \varphi {\bf u}$.
1. Using the definition of the layer average, the momentum equation [](layered-momentum-1) should also be thickness-weighted. Perhaps that goes away with conservation of mass?

> 1. How do I justify changing from $\nabla_z$ to $\nabla_r$ for terms other than the pressure gradient? Particularly $\nabla K$?

Author: Yes, but we never compute $dK/dz \nabla_r z$. I'm guessing it's negligible, but I've never seen anyone discuss it. Since $\nabla K$ comes from advection, I'm guessing you write the finite volume form (div(u u )) in the tilted coordinates and it works out anyway.

> 1. How do I justify changing from $\nabla_z$ to $\nabla_r$ for terms other than the pressure gradient? Particularly $\nabla K$?

Reviewer 6: I asked ChatGPT about this.  I think its answer makes perfect sense.  Effectively, we can switch between $\nabla_z$ and $\nabla_r$ in most situations because the aspect ratio is so large (the exception being the pressure gradient, because vertical gradients in pressure are equally huge compared to horizontal.

> ### Why can we just switch to ∇ₙ and ignore those terms?
> 
> This is a subtle but important modeling approximation. The reason this is *commonly done and usually acceptable* is because:
> 
> - The **difference between ∇_z and ∇_r** involves vertical gradients projected into the horizontal. These are **small** under the assumption that the **layers are nearly horizontal**, i.e., the slope ∂z/∂x ~ 10⁻³ or less. These small slopes make the correction terms of order ε ≪ 1, and thus negligible to first order.
> 
> - In particular, the **identity** you mentioned:
>   
>   ```
>   u · ∇u = ζ ẑ × u + ∇K
>   ```
> 
>   is **coordinate-independent** as long as the coordinate system is orthogonal and we’re staying within horizontal layers (not mixing in vertical velocity). So if we rewrite it in terms of gradients **within a layer**, the identity still holds approximately:
> 
>   ```
>   u · ∇_r u ≈ ζ ĥ × u + ∇_r K
>   ```
> 
>   where ∇_r is the **horizontal gradient along layers**, and ĥ is now the local vertical to the layer.
> 
> - Layered models are **designed** such that dynamics are mostly along layers; vertical exchanges (diapycnal) are parameterized separately. So projecting all operators along layers is both consistent and computationally efficient.

> 1. How do I justify changing from $\nabla_z$ to $\nabla_r$ for terms other than the pressure gradient? Particularly $\nabla K$?

Reviewer 6: I added a paragraph that I think addresses this.

= \frac{\partial }{\partial p}\frac{\partial p}{\partial z} \left( \nu_v \frac{\partial u}{\partial p} \frac{\partial p}{\partial z}\right)
= \rho g^2\frac{\partial }{\partial p} \left( \nu_v \rho \frac{\partial u}{\partial p} \right).
$$ (mom-vert-diff-z-p)

We choose to use $z$ values for simplicity. A single vertical derivative of an arbitrary variable $\varphi$ at mid-layer is

$$
\frac{\partial \varphi_k}{\partial z}
= \frac{\varphi_k^{top} - \varphi_k^{bot} }{z_k^{top} - z_k^{bot}}
$$ (vertderiv1)

and a second derivative is

$$
\frac{\partial }{\partial z} \left(
\frac{\partial \varphi_k}{\partial z} \right)
=
\frac{1}{z_{k}^{top} - z_{k+1}^{top}} \left(
\frac{\varphi_{k-1} - \varphi_k }{z_{k-1}^{mid} - z_k^{mid}}
 -
\frac{\varphi_{k} - \varphi_{k+1} }{z_{k}^{mid} - z_{k+1}^{mid}}
\right)
$$ (vertderiv2)

Thus, the vertical momentum diffusion is

$$
\frac{\partial }{\partial z} \left( \nu_v \frac{\partial u_{e,k}}{\partial z} \right)
=
\frac{1}{z_{e,k}^{top} - z_{e,k+1}^{top}} \left(
\nu_{e,k}^{top}
\frac{u_{e,k-1} - u_k }{z_{e,k-1}^{mid} - z_k^{mid}}
 -
\nu_{e,k+1}^{top}
\frac{u_{e,k} - u_{e,k+1} }{z_{e,k}^{mid} - z_{e,k+1}^{mid}}

> \right)

Reviewer: i don't understand why the nu's are both top but with k, k+1, why not `nu_k^top` and `nu_k^bot`?

Author: Good point. I changed from bot to top with k+1 in all discrete forms, to match the code array names.

$$ (discrete-mom-vert-diff)

> The native locations for $z$ and $\nu$ are at the mid-layer and cell center, so they must be interpolated to the vertical layer interface and horizontal edge for this computation. This stencil is applied as an implicit tri-diagonal solve at the end of the time step. See details in the [tridiagonal solver design document](TridiagonalSolver) and forthcoming vertical mixing design document.

Reviewer: \nu usually lives on the vertical interfaces, not mid layer.

Author: Thanks. I realized this sentence is not necessary, as we compute $\nu$ wherever it is needed.

$$ (discrete-tracer-del2)

See [Omega V0 Section 3.3.2](OmegaV0ShallowWater.md#del2-tracer-diffusion) for details of this calculation.

#### Biharmonic diffusion (del4)
The biharmonic is a Laplacian operator applied twice,

$$
 - h_{i,k} \nabla \cdot \left( \kappa_{4,e,k} \nabla
\right[
\nabla \cdot \left(  \nabla \varphi_{i,k} \right)
\left]
 \right).
$$ (discrete-tracer-del4)

Each of these operators are written as horizontal stencils in the [Omega V0 Operator Formulation Section](OmegaV0ShallowWater.md#operator-formulation)

#### Vertical tracer diffusion
As discussed above in the [momentum section](#vertical-momentum-diffusion), vertical derivatives may be written in terms of $z$ or $p$,

$$
\frac{\partial }{\partial z} \left( \kappa_v \frac{\partial {\bf \varphi}}{\partial z} \right)
= \rho g^2 \frac{\partial }{\partial p} \left( \kappa_v \rho \frac{\partial {\bf \varphi}}{\partial p} \right)
$$ (discrete-tracer-vertdiff)
and $z$ is chosen. The second derivative stencil is

$$
h_{i,k} \frac{\partial }{\partial z} \left( \kappa_v \frac{\partial \varphi_{i,k}}{\partial z} \right)
=
\frac{h_{i,k}}{z_{i,k}^{top} - z_{i,k+1}^{top}} \left(
\kappa_{i,k}^{top}

> \frac{\varphi_{i,k-1} - \varphi_k }{z_{i,k-1}^{mid} - z_k^{mid}}

Reviewer: same comment as above, why just `top` on `kappa`?

Author: Changed all to top.

$$
\begin{aligned}
\nabla_z \cdot \left( {\bf u} \otimes {\bf u}  \right) &=
\boldsymbol{u} \cdot \nabla_z \boldsymbol{u} \\
&= (\nabla_z \times \boldsymbol{u}) \times \boldsymbol{u} + \nabla_z \frac{|\boldsymbol{u}|^2}{2} \\
&= \{\boldsymbol{k} \cdot (\nabla_z \times \boldsymbol{u})\} \boldsymbol{k} \times \boldsymbol{u} + \nabla_z \frac{|\boldsymbol{u}|^2}{2} \\
&= \zeta \boldsymbol{u}^{\perp} + \nabla_z K.
\end{aligned}
$$ (advection-identity)

where $\zeta$ is relative vorticity and $K$ is kinetic energy. This step separates the horizontal advection into non-divergent and non-rotational components, which is useful in the final TRiSK formulation.

#### Assumptions

For a primitive equation ocean model, we assume the fluid is incompressible and hydrostatic. For Omega we are not making the Boussinesq assumption, so all density terms are the full density. In particular, the density coefficient of the pressure gradient in [](#continuous-momentum) is not a constant, as it is in primitive equation models like POP and MPAS-Ocean.

**Incompressible:** Assume that the three-dimensional velocity field is nondivergent,

$$

>  \nabla_z \cdot {\bf u} + \frac{\partial w}{\partial z}  = 0.

Reviewer 4: This implies volume conservation.

Author: That is an excellent point. From [source](https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/engineering/incompressible-fluid): "An incompressible fluid has zero compressibility; therefore, regardless of pressure, it has a constant density".  It sounds like a non-Boussinesq fluid is by definition not incompressible. But a compressible fluid supports sound waves, and we definitely don't want that. That is confusing. The [MIT-GCM equation set](https://mitgcm.readthedocs.io/en/latest/overview/eqn_motion_ocn.html) might help.

Reviewer 6: My research suggests that non-Boussinesq models use the full mass-conservation equation:
```suggestion
 \frac{\partial \rho}{\partial t} + \nabla \cdot (\rho \mathbf{u}) = 0
```
My understanding is that sound waves get filtered out because we're using hydrostatic balance for the vertical momentum equation, but I also see some indications that other filtering techniques may be needed.  See:
https://acmeclimate.slack.com/archives/C08PQP0U64R/p1746367303787279

Reviewer 6: I added a paragraph on acoustic waves and why we are either filtering them out (hydrostatic approximation) or should be able to resolve them in the barotropic substepping (in the case of Lamb waves).

Derivations of ocean model equations with pressure as the vertical variable may be found in [de Szoeke and Samelson 2002](https://journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/phoc/32/7/1520-0485_2002_032_2194_tdbtba_2.0.co_2.xml) and [Losch et al. 2003](https://journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/phoc/34/1/1520-0485_2004_034_0306_hsacgc_2.0.co_2.xml). 

The vertical advection terms use the fundamental theorem of calculus to integrate a derivative in $z$, resulting in boundary conditions at the layer interfaces. This makes intuitive sense as a mass balance. For example, in the absence of horizontal advection and sources, the mass equation is simply

$$
\frac{\partial h_k}{\partial t}
= \left[ \rho_k w_k \right]^{bot} - \left[ \rho_k w_k \right]^{top}.
$$ (layered-mass-vert-adv)

This states that the change in mass in the layer is the incoming mass from below minus the outgoing mass above, since the vertical velocity $w$ is positive upwards. The vertical advection of momentum and tracers have a similar interpretation.

### Questions

> 1. How do integrals in  [](#z-integration-momentum) to [](#z-integration-tracers) turn into the layered form [](layered-momentum-1) to [](layered-tracer-1) when there are products in the terms? For example, $\zeta_k {\bf u}^\perp_k$, $\nabla K$ and $\rho \varphi {\bf u}$.

Reviewer 6: I believe MOM6 (and perhaps other models as well) assume that prognostic variables ($\Theta, S_A,  {\bf u}^\perp$, etc.) are vertically constant in a layer and have jumps at layer interfaces.  This allows for a mathematically consistent treatment.  I believe this assumption is not require within layers (e.g. for the pressure gradient, they allow $\Theta$ and $S_A$ to vary linearly between neighboring cells in the same layer).

Author: Thanks, that is helpful. I will update the document but wanted to think about that further.

Reviewer 3: Just seconding what Xylar said, T,S, and the specific volume are considered constant (vertically) within a layer. P considered linear in the vertical. T,S considered linear in the horizontal

> 1. Using the definition of the layer average, the momentum equation [](layered-momentum-1) should also be thickness-weighted. Perhaps that goes away with conservation of mass?

Reviewer 6: I think this deserves more discussion.  I found that the vertically integrated (rather than vertically averaged) barotropic momentum equation was the more sensible one.  Perhaps the same is true of the layered momentum equation.

Author: Yes, I need to think about that more. It appears that mass and tracers are vertically mass-averaged (i.e. with factor of $\rho$) and momentum is simply averaged in the vertical without $\rho$. I'm stuck on what happens to the $\Delta z$ in the momentum equation after integrating. Perhaps it just divides out.

Reviewer 6: > It appears that mass and tracers are vertically mass-averaged (i.e. with factor of ρ) and momentum is simply averaged in the vertical without ρ.

While I see what you mean, this doesn't sit well with me.  I think we need to search around more on what others do and figure this out before we consider this settled.

Reviewer 5: The $\Delta z$ doesn't divide out for me. The $\left[ w_k {\bf u}_k \right]^{top} - \left[  w_k {\bf u}_k \right]^{bot}$ term has units of $m^2/s^2$. It looks like you could be missing a factor of layer thickness in the other terms.

Reviewer 5: It could make more sense to present Equation 35 (the pressure gradient components) and then use those to integrate from $z^{bot}$ to $z^{top}$ for Equation 26.

$$ (dvarphidx)

We may define the tilted horizontal variable $x'$ as we please. The simplest definition is $x'(x)\equiv x$. Then $\partial x / \partial x'=1$. Rearranging [](#dvarphidx) and repeating for $y$,

$$
\frac{\partial \varphi}{\partial x} =
\frac{\partial \varphi}{\partial x'}
- \frac{\partial \varphi}{\partial z} \frac{\partial z}{\partial x'}\\
\frac{\partial \varphi}{\partial y} =
\frac{\partial \varphi}{\partial y'}
- \frac{\partial \varphi}{\partial z} \frac{\partial z}{\partial y'}.
$$ (dvarphidxy)

This may be written in vector form as

$$
\nabla_z \varphi = \nabla_r \varphi - \frac{\partial \varphi}{\partial z} \nabla_r z.
$$ (dvarphidnabla)

### Pressure Gradient

The most important change due to general vertical coordinates is in the pressure gradient term.  Using the pressure in [](#dvarphidnabla),

$$
\begin{aligned}
-\frac{1}{\rho} \nabla_z p
&=-\frac{1}{\rho}  \nabla_r p +\frac{1}{\rho}  \frac{\partial p}{\partial z} \nabla_r z \\
&=-\frac{1}{\rho}  \nabla_r p - g \nabla_r z \\
&= - v \nabla_r p -   \nabla_r \Phi
\end{aligned}
$$ (gradp)

> where we have substituted hydrostatic balance [](hydrostatic-balance) and specific volume $v\equiv 1/\rho$. The geopoential due to a constant gravitational field is $d \Phi/dz=g$, so that $\Phi = gz + c$ where $c$ is an arbitrary constant. Thus in the equation above, $\nabla_r \Phi = g \nabla_r z$. The geopotential is a more general form than a constant $g$, and allows for alterations in the gravitational field due to self attraction and loading and tidal forces. Further details will be provided in the forthcoming pressure gradient design document.

Reviewer 6: I'm not fond of this approach.  I would prefer that we keep a general $\Phi(x,y,z,t) = g z + \Phi_0(x,y,t)$` from the start and derive the equations with this.  Otherwise, we are left making hand-wavy arguments when we try to go to the more general form later.

Author: Good point. I updated the text, which can be [seen here](https://portal.nersc.gov/project/e3sm/mpeterse/omega/design-doc-v1-eqns/_build/html/design/OmegaV1GoverningEqns.html#pressure-gradient). It looks like I still need to add a $\nabla_r \Phi_0$ to the end of (35), and that $\Phi_0$ is where SAL and tides can be added at a later time. Do you agree?

Reviewer 6: Yes, exactly.  Thanks for working on this.

1. Omega will use the updated equation of state TEOS10, while MPAS-Ocean used the Jackett-McDougall equation of state.

The planned versions of Omega are:

- **Omega-0: Shallow water equations with identical vertical layers and inactive tracers.** In his first version, there is no vertical transport or advection. The tracer equation is horizontal advection-diffusion, but tracers do not feed back to dynamics. Pressure gradient is simply gradient of sea surface height. Capability is similar to [Ringler et al. 2010](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021999109006780)
- **Omega-1.0: Layered ocean, idealized, no surface fluxes.** This adds active temperature, salinity, and density as a function of pressure in the vertical. Vertical advection and diffusion terms are added to the momentum and tracer equations. An equation of state and simple vertical mixing, such as constant coefficient, are needed. Capability and testing are similar to [Petersen et al. 2015](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1463500314001796). Tests include overflow, internal gravity wave, baroclinic channel, seamount, and vertical merry-go-round.

> - **Omega-1.1: Layered ocean, idealized, with surface fluxes.** Addition of simple vertical mixing scheme such as Pacanowski & Philander; nonlinear equation of state (TEOS10); tracer surface restoring to a constant field; constant wind forcing; and flux-corrected transport for horizontal advection. Testing will be with the baroclinic gyre and single column tests of surface fluxes and vertical mixing.

Reviewer 6: "constant wind forcing" should probably be "constant-in-time wind forcing".

momentum:

$$
\frac{D \rho {\bf u}_{3D} }{D t} \equiv
\frac{\partial \rho {\bf u}_{3D}}{\partial t}
 + \nabla_{3D} \cdot \left( \rho {\bf u}_{3D} \otimes {\bf u}_{3D}  \right)
  = - \nabla_{3D} p
+ \rho {\bf D}^u + \rho {\bf F}^u
$$ (continuous-momentum)

mass:

$$
\frac{D \rho}{D t} \equiv
\frac{\partial \rho }{\partial t}
 + \nabla_{3D} \cdot \left( \rho  {\bf u}_{3D}  \right)
= 0
$$ (continuous-mass)

tracers:

$$
\frac{D \rho \varphi }{D t} \equiv
\frac{\partial \rho \varphi}{\partial t}
 + \nabla_{3D} \cdot \left( \rho \varphi {\bf u}_{3D}  \right)
= D^\varphi + Q^\varphi
$$ (continuous-tracer)

Here we have express the following terms as a general operators, with examples of specific forms provided below: the dissipation ${\bf D}^u$, momentum forcing ${\bf F}^u$, tracer diffusion $D^\varphi$, and tracer sources and sinks $Q^\varphi$. The momentum equation can be rewritten using the product rule on $\rho {\bf u}$, mass conservation, and dividing by $\rho$, as:

$$
\frac{D {\bf u}_{3D} }{D t} \equiv
\frac{\partial {\bf u}_{3D}}{\partial t}

> + {\bf u}_{3D}\cdot \nabla_{3D} {\bf u}_{3D}

Reviewer 6: When `\rho` varies with space, this is only one of 3 terms that should be here:
$$
∇⋅(ρu⊗u)=ρ(u⋅∇)u+(u⋅∇ρ)u+u(∇⋅(ρu))
$$

Reviewer 6: I follow this now.  Sorry for the noise here!

  = - \frac{1}{\rho} \nabla_{3D} p
+ {\bf D}^u + {\bf F}^u

> $$ (continuous-momentum-rho)

Reviewer 6: I don't think we want to do this for non-Boussinesq equations.  We need to integrate over layers in this form, not the one divided by density.

> Geophysical fluids such as the ocean and atmosphere are rotating and stratified, and horizontal velocities are orders of magnitude larger than vertical velocities. It is therefore convenient to separate the horizontal and vertical as ${\bf u}_{3D} = \left( {\bf u}, w \right)$ and $\nabla_{3D} = \left( \nabla_z, d/dz \right)$ where $z$ is the vertical direction in a local coordinate frame on the Earth's surface and $w$ is the vertical velocity. The $z$ subscript on $\nabla_z$ is to remind us that this is the true horizontal gradient (perpendicular to $z$), as opposed to gradients within tilted layers used in the following section. The gravitational force $g {\bf k}$ is included in ${\bf F}^u$. The rotating frame of reference results in the Coriolis force $f {\bf k} \times {\bf u} \equiv f {\bf u}^\perp$, where $f$ is the Coriolis parameter and ${\bf u}^\perp$ is the horizontal velocity rotated $90^o$ from $\bf u$. See any textbook in the [References](#references) for a full derivation.

Reviewer 5: I find the `z` notation in $\nabla_z$ confusing for a horizontal gradient. Correct me if this is standard notation. Maybe add the perpendicular symbol?

Author: The standard notation for tilted layers is $\nabla_r$, as in [Adcroft and Hallberg (2006)](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1463500305000090) or $\nabla_{\sigma}$ in [Griffies et al (2000)](http://sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1463500300000147). Since $r$ is the tilted near-vertical coordinate, I used $\nabla_z$ for the exact vertical $z$ by analogy. I think $\nabla_\perp$ is confusing because the notation is not clear as to whether it is perpendicular to $z$ or $r$.

Reviewer 3: If the confusion is specific to z, could we include $\nabla_{z=cst}$ just to be explicit? I agree with both this is a common notation, but I also agree that it can get confusing to people unfamiliar with it. The other option is $\nabla|_z$

Reviewer 6: Yes, after thinking about this for a couple of days, I agree that $\perp$ isn't great.  For example, we use $u^\perp$ to indicate velocity perpendicular to $u$, which is quite a different use.  While it's $\nabla_z$ wasn't immediately very intuitive to me, I do agree that it's consistent with $\nabla_r$, and that convention is established in the literature.

Reviewer 6: @alicebarthel, I could get behind your second suggestion of $\nabla|_z$.

> Geophysical fluids such as the ocean and atmosphere are rotating and stratified, and horizontal velocities are orders of magnitude larger than vertical velocities. It is therefore convenient to separate the horizontal and vertical as ${\bf u}_{3D} = \left( {\bf u}, w \right)$ and $\nabla_{3D} = \left( \nabla_z, d/dz \right)$ where $z$ is the vertical direction in a local coordinate frame on the Earth's surface and $w$ is the vertical velocity. The $z$ subscript on $\nabla_z$ is to remind us that this is the true horizontal gradient (perpendicular to $z$), as opposed to gradients within tilted layers used in the following section. The gravitational force $g {\bf k}$ is included in ${\bf F}^u$. The rotating frame of reference results in the Coriolis force $f {\bf k} \times {\bf u} \equiv f {\bf u}^\perp$, where $f$ is the Coriolis parameter and ${\bf u}^\perp$ is the horizontal velocity rotated $90^o$ from $\bf u$. See any textbook in the [References](#references) for a full derivation.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Geophysical fluids such as the ocean and atmosphere are rotating and stratified, and horizontal velocities are orders of magnitude larger than vertical velocities. It is therefore convenient to separate the horizontal and vertical as ${\bf u}_{3D} = \left( {\bf u}, w \right)$ and $\nabla_{3D} = \left( \nabla_z, d/dz \right)$ where $z$ is the vertical direction in a plane tangent to the Earth's surface (f-plane) and $w$ is the vertical velocity. The $z$ subscript on $\nabla_z$ is to remind us that this is the true horizontal gradient (perpendicular to $z$), as opposed to gradients within tilted layers used in the following section. The gravitational force $g {\bf k}$ is included in ${\bf F}^u$. The f-plane approximation results in the Coriolis force $f {\bf k} \times {\bf u} \equiv f {\bf u}^\perp$, where $f$ is the Coriolis parameter and ${\bf u}^\perp$ is the horizontal velocity rotated $90^o$ from $\bf u$. See any textbook in the [References](#references) for a full derivation.
```

Reviewer 6: I agree that the equations are equivalent (except for the spatial variability of f) but I'm concerned that the term implies a constant `f` strongly enough that it might lead folks to incorrectly assume that's what we're using.

Reviewer 5: Totally comfortable changing the wording to something that is more clear

Reviewer: Seconding @xylar f-plane approximation to me implies constant f.  As you say they are functionally equivalent.  I guess you could say the f-plane approximation is made at every point on the sphere, but I prefer Xylar's rewrite to trying to work in f-plane here.

Author: Thanks. I took @xylar's alterations above.

> Geophysical fluids such as the ocean and atmosphere are rotating and stratified, and horizontal velocities are orders of magnitude larger than vertical velocities. It is therefore convenient to separate the horizontal and vertical as ${\bf u}_{3D} = \left( {\bf u}, w \right)$ and $\nabla_{3D} = \left( \nabla_z, d/dz \right)$ where $z$ is the vertical direction in a local coordinate frame on the Earth's surface and $w$ is the vertical velocity. The $z$ subscript on $\nabla_z$ is to remind us that this is the true horizontal gradient (perpendicular to $z$), as opposed to gradients within tilted layers used in the following section. The gravitational force $g {\bf k}$ is included in ${\bf F}^u$. The rotating frame of reference results in the Coriolis force $f {\bf k} \times {\bf u} \equiv f {\bf u}^\perp$, where $f$ is the Coriolis parameter and ${\bf u}^\perp$ is the horizontal velocity rotated $90^o$ from $\bf u$. See any textbook in the [References](#references) for a full derivation.

Author: Done. Geopotential is now used throughout.

=
{\bf u} \cdot \nabla_z {\bf u} + w \frac{\partial {\bf u}}{\partial z}.
$$ (advection-3d2d)

The horizontal component may be replaced with the vector identity

$$
\begin{aligned}
{\bf u} \cdot \nabla_z {\bf u}
&= (\nabla_z \times {\bf u}) \times {\bf u} + \nabla_z \frac{|{\bf u}|^2}{2} \\
&= \left( \boldsymbol{k} \cdot (\nabla_z \times {\bf u})\right)
\left( \boldsymbol{k} \times {\bf u} \right) + \nabla_z \frac{|{\bf u}|^2}{2} \\
&= \zeta {\bf u}^{\perp} + \nabla_z K,
\end{aligned}
$$ (advection-identity)

where $\zeta$ is relative vorticity and $K$ is kinetic energy. This step separates the horizontal advection into non-divergent and non-rotational components, which is useful in the final TRiSK formulation.

#### Assumptions

For a primitive equation ocean model, we assume the fluid is hydrostatic. For Omega we are not making the Boussinesq assumption, so all density-dependent terms use the full density. In particular, the density coefficient of the pressure gradient in [](#continuous-momentum) is not a constant, as it is in primitive equation models like POP and MPAS-Ocean.

**Hydrostatic:** Beginning with the vertical momentum equation,

$$
\frac{D w }{D t}
  =

>   - \frac{1}{\rho} \frac{\partial p}{\partial z} - g + {\bf D}^u + {\bf F}^u

Reviewer 5: I think the forcing terms are now just the vertical components of those forcing vectors. I.e., ${\bf D}^{u} dot \bf k$ or $D^z$.

Author: Agreed. Done.

A concern when using the full, compressible continuity equation is that this might support acoustic waves with wave speeds on the order of 1500 m/s, requiring an extremely small time step. According to [Griffies and Adcroft (2008)](https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/177GM18) and [de Szoeke and Samelson (2002)](https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0485(2002)032%3C2194:TDBTBA%3E2.0.CO;2), the hydrostatic approximation removes vertical sound waves, leaving only barotropic acoustic modes called Lamb waves.  Fortunately, the Lamb waves can be "subsumed" into the external gravity mode because the scale height of the ocean is much larger (200 km) than its depth (~5 km).  This suggests that Lamb waves should not produce any additional constraints on our barotropic time step (though we should keep an eye on this).  For more details on Lamb waves, see [Dukowicz (2013)](https://doi.org/10.1175/MWR-D-13-00148.1)

#### Final Continuous Equations

The final form of the continuous conservation equations for a non-Boussinesq, hydrostatic ocean are

momentum:

$$
\frac{\partial {\bf u}}{\partial t}
+ \zeta {\bf u}^\perp + f {\bf u}^\perp
+ w\frac{\partial {\bf u}}{\partial z}

>   = - \frac{1}{\rho} \nabla_z p

Reviewer 6: We need the geopotential term here and in subsequent terms.  It should not be lumped in F.
```suggestion
  = - \frac{1}{\rho} \nabla_z p - \nabla_z \Phi
```

Author: I used $\rho$ in the first half of the document because that is more common in GFD books. I transition to specific volume in the [pressure gradient section](https://portal.nersc.gov/project/e3sm/mpeterse/omega/design-doc-v1-eqns/_build/html/design/OmegaV1GoverningEqns.html#pressure-gradient), and then use $v$ after that.

Reviewer 6: Yes, I think that's fine.

  - \nabla_z K
+ {\bf D}^u + {\bf F}^u
$$ (continuous-momentum-final)

mass:

$$
\frac{\partial \rho }{\partial t}
 + \nabla_z \cdot \left( \rho  {\bf u}  \right)
 + \frac{\partial}{\partial z} \left(  \rho  w \right)
= 0
$$ (continuous-mass-final)

tracers:

$$
\frac{\partial \rho \varphi}{\partial t}
 + \nabla_z \cdot \left( \rho \varphi {\bf u}  \right)
 + \frac{\partial}{\partial z} \left(  \rho \varphi w \right)
= D^\varphi + Q^\varphi
$$ (continuous-tracer-final)

equation of state:

$$
\rho = f_{eos}(p,\Theta,S).
$$ (continuous-eos-final)

hydrostatic pressure:

$$
p(x,y,z) = p^{surf}(x,y) + \int_{z}^{z^{surf}} \rho g dz'.
$$ (continuous-hydrostatic-pressure-final)

> Here the $\nabla$ operators are exactly horizontal; we expand terms for tilted layers in the following section. The momentum diffusion terms include Laplacian (del2), biharmonic (del4), and vertical viscosity,

Author: done.

$$
{\bf D}^u

> = \nu_2 \nabla^2 {\bf u} - \nu_4 \nabla^4 {\bf u}

Author: done.

 + \frac{\partial }{\partial z} \left( \nu_v \frac{\partial {\bf u}}{\partial z} \right)
$$ (continuous-h_mom_diff)
and may also include a Rayleigh drag and eventually parameterizations. Momentum forcing is due to wind stress and bottom drag. Similarly, the tracer diffusion terms include Laplacian (del2), and vertical viscosity,

$$
D^\varphi =

>  \nabla\cdot\left(\rho \kappa_2 \nabla\varphi \right)

Author: done.

+ \rho \frac{\partial }{\partial z}
  \left( \kappa_v \frac{\partial \varphi}{\partial z} \right),
$$ (continuous-v_tr_diff)

and may also include a biharmonic (del4) term and parameterizations such as Redi mixing. Sources and sinks include surface fluxes from the atmosphere and land, and bio-geo-chemical reactions.
All of the diffusion and forcing terms are written in more detail with the [Discrete Equations](#discrete-equations) below.

> ## 4. Layered Equations

Reviewer 6: I would like to expand this section to include the equivalent derivation to Ringler et al. (2013) A2 but with mass-thickness rather than geometric thickness.  I'm going to finish my review for now so I can work on that.

> Omega-1 will be non-Boussinesq, which means that density is not assumed to be constant in any terms. This results in a mass conservation equation, rather than a volume conservation equation. The fully continuous equations were presented in the previous section. Here we derive the layered equations by discretizing in the vertical, while the horizontal remains continuous. We discretize by integrating in the vertical from the lower surface $z=z_k^{bot}(x,y)$ to $z=z_k^{top}(x,y)$ for the layer with index $k$, as described in [Ringler et al. 2013](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1463500313000760) Appendix A.2. Equivalently, we can vertically integrate from a deeper pressure surface $p=p_k^{bot}(x,y)$ (higher pressure) to $p=p_k^{top}(x,y)$ where $p$ and $z$ are related by the hydrostatic pressure equation [](#continuous-hydrostatic-pressure).

Author: done.

### Layer Integration

> For non-Boussinesq layered equations we begin by defining the mass-thickness of layer $k$ as

Reviewer 5: Add the units of mass-thickness (kg/m2?)

$$
h_k(x,y,t)
 \equiv \int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}} \rho dz = \frac{1}{g} \int_{p_k^{top}}^{p_k^{bot}} dp.
$$ (def-h)

The letter $h$ is used because this is the familiar variable for thickness in Boussinesq primitive equations. In the Boussinesq case the thickness equation describes conservation of volume because $h_k^{Bouss}$ is volume normalized by horizontal area, resulting in a height,

$$
h_k^{Bouss}(x,y,t)
 \equiv \int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}} dz.
$$ (def-h-bouss)

> In this document we remain with the more general non-Boussinesq case, where $h_k$ is mass per unit area (kg/m$^2$). Since horizontal cell area remains constant, the thickness equation is a statement of conservation of mass.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In this document we remain with the more general non-Boussinesq case, where $h_k$ is mass per unit area (kg/m$^2$). Since horizontal cell area remains constant in time, the thickness equation is a statement of conservation of mass.
```

$$
\varphi_k(x,y,t)
\equiv \frac{\int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}} \rho \varphi dz}{\int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}} \rho dz}
= \frac{\int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}} \rho \varphi dz}{h_k}
$$(def-mass-thickness-average)

At this point our derivation has not made any assumptions about density, and may be used for both Boussinesq and non-Boussinesq fluids. A Boussinesq derivation would now assume small variations in density and replace $\rho(x,y,z,t)$ with a constant $\rho_0$ everywhere but the pressure gradient coefficient. In that case $\rho$ divides out in [](#def-mass-thickness-average) the Boussinesq layer quantities would simply be thickness-weighted averages.

We can now derive the layered equations. Integrate the continuous equations [](continuous-momentum-final), [](continuous-mass-final), [](continuous-tracer-final) in $z$ from $z_k^{bot}$ to $z_k^{top}$,

$$
\frac{\partial }{\partial t} \int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}} {\bf u} dz
+  \int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}}  \left( \zeta + f \right){\bf u}^\perp dz
+  \int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}} \frac{\partial }{\partial z} \left(  w{\bf u} \right) dz

>   =  \int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}}  \left[- \frac{1}{\rho}\nabla_z p - \nabla_z K

Reviewer 4: I think we need to be more careful about what happens when integrals and derivatives are swapped in this section since the limits of integration are space/time dependent. We need to use Leibniz's rule with appropriate boundary conditions.

>   =  \int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}}  \left[- \frac{1}{\rho}\nabla_z p - \nabla_z K

Reviewer 4: I agree. While the gz would disappear in z-coordinates, the tidal terms would still be present.

+ {\bf D}^u + {\bf F}^u \right] dz

> $$ (z-integration-momentum)

Reviewer 6: To get to the layered equations, each of these needs to be an integral over `\rho dz`.  This means, we need to start with the momentum, rather than the velocity equation here.

$$
\frac{\partial }{\partial t}  \int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}} \rho dz
 +\nabla_z \cdot \left( \int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}} \rho  {\bf u} dz \right)
 + \int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}}\frac{\partial}{\partial z} \left(  \rho  w \right) dz
= 0
$$ (z-integration-mass)

$$
\frac{\partial }{\partial t} \int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}} \rho \varphi  dz
 + \nabla_z \cdot \left( \int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}} \rho \varphi {\bf u} dz  \right)
 + \int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}} \frac{\partial}{\partial z} \left(  \rho \varphi w \right) dz
= \int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}} \left( D^\varphi + Q^\varphi \right) dz
$$ (z-integration-tracers)

This results in conservation equations that are valid over the layer. The momentum variables are simply vertically averaged. Tracer variables are vertically mass-averaged, as defined in [](def-mass-thickness-average). The subscript $k$ denotes a variable average over layer $k$. This system is now discrete in the vertical, but remains continuous in the horizontal and in time.

$$
\frac{\partial {\bf u}_k}{\partial t}
+ \zeta_k {\bf u}_k^{\perp}
+ f {\bf u}_k^{\perp}
+ \left[ w_k {\bf u}_k \right]^{top} - \left[  w_k {\bf u}_k \right]^{bot}
=

> - \frac{1}{\rho} \nabla_z p_k

Reviewer 6: Geopotential term is missing

Author: I changed the momentum equation derivation to have grad Phi throughout.

- \frac{\partial \varphi}{\partial z} \frac{\partial z}{\partial y'}.
\end{aligned}
$$ (dvarphidxy)

This may be written in vector form as

$$
\nabla_z \varphi = \nabla_r \varphi - \frac{\partial \varphi}{\partial z} \nabla_r z.
$$ (dvarphidnabla)

### Pressure Gradient

For most terms, we can safely assume $\nabla_z \approx \nabla_r$ because the vertical to horizontal aspect ratio even at very high horizontal resolution is on the order of $\epsilon ~ 10^{-3}$ (thought may need to re-assess this assumption if we decide to use strongly sloped layers). This applies, for example, to the curl operator uset to compute the relative vorticity and the gradient applied to the kinetic energy in [](z-integration-momentum).  

The exception is the pressure gradient term.  This is becasue strong vertical and week horizontal pressure gradients mean that both terms in the chain rule [](dvarphidnabla) are of the same order and must be retained.  Substituting pressure for $\varphi$ in [](#dvarphidnabla),

$$
\begin{aligned}
-\frac{1}{\rho} \nabla_z p
&=-\frac{1}{\rho}  \nabla_r p +\frac{1}{\rho}  \frac{\partial p}{\partial z} \nabla_r z \\
&=-\frac{1}{\rho}  \nabla_r p - g \nabla_r z \\

> &= - v \nabla_r p - \nabla_r \Phi,

Author: Here's a little thing I've been mulling over. Here we express $g \nabla_r z$ in terms of general geopotential on the previous line. I believe that is incorrect. The geopotential gradient is there at the very beginning as one of the forces. All the way back in eqn 1 we can include it as

${\bf F}^u = \nabla \Phi + Drag + Wind + ...$

so that gravity, SAL, tidal forcing - everything is there as a force. That is, at the very beginning

$\nabla_{3D} \Phi = g {\bf k} + \nabla_{3D} \Phi_{SAL}  + \nabla_{3D} \Phi_{tides}$

Hydrostatic balance is between dp/dz and gravity, and all other forces are uninvolved, including SAL and Tides. So it is not correct to put the $\nabla \Phi$ on the line above, it really is just $g \nabla_r z$. We can later include $\nabla \Phi_{SAL}$ and $\nabla \Phi_{tides}$  but those just originated from ${\bf F}^u$. Of course, in the final equation set we can combine them and write the whole thing together as, within layer now:

$\nabla_r \Phi = g \nabla_r z + \nabla_r\Phi_{SAL}  + \nabla_r \Phi_{tides}$.

Reviewer 6: I don't agree with this. I think hydrostatic balance is between pressure and the full force of gravity, including its time dependencies due to tides, SAL, etc. This is why I have been pushing hard to include them in the full derivation.

Author: The google AI says tidal forces are not part of hydrostatic balance. But I looked at its references and could not find a direct source for that. I could ask Brian Arbic. 
<img width="856" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5a7cac8f-61f1-41c6-a6ef-094db57f637f" />

But remember that we can write it in this form for the final equations:

$\nabla_r \Phi = g \nabla_r z + \nabla_r\Phi_{SAL}  + \nabla_r \Phi_{tides}$

I'm just saying that $\nabla_r\Phi_{SAL}  + \nabla_r \Phi_{tides}$ originate from the original ${\bf F}^u$ term, and not from this substitution of hydrstatic balance into the pressure gradient force in its expansion for tilted layers. A practical result is that if you insert them with the pressure gradient expansion then they are negative in the end, and that doesn't make sense.

Reviewer 6: I think because the the other Phi terms don't depend on z, they don't appear in hydrostatic balance.  So I think that's right.

What I am mainly asking for is that $\nabla_r\Phi_{SAL}  + \nabla_r \Phi_{tides}$ not be included in ${\bf F}^u$ and instead that we write the full $\nabla_r\Phi$ in any horizontal equations.  I do not like sweeping these terms under the ${\bf F}^u$ rug.

Author: I changed the [governing eqns DD](https://portal.nersc.gov/project/e3sm/mpeterse/omega/design-doc-v1-eqns/_build/html/design/OmegaV1GoverningEqns.html#equation-continuous-momentum) to have grad Phi throughout. @xylar I think this addresses your concern. Specifically, the [pressure grad section](https://portal.nersc.gov/project/e3sm/mpeterse/omega/design-doc-v1-eqns/_build/html/design/OmegaV1GoverningEqns.html#pressure-gradient) is very explicit about how we end up with grad Phi in the final equations.

### Vertical Transport
The integration in [](#z-integration-momentum) to [](#z-integration-tracers) changes the vertical velocity $w$ in m/s to a vertical mass-thickness transport $\omega=\rho w$ in kg/s/m$^2$. Here $w$ is the Latin letter and $\omega$ is the Greek letter omega.  One can think of fluid velocity $w$ as a volume transport, normalized by area, in units of length per time. Analogously, $\omega$ is mass-thickness transport, which is mass transport per unit area (kg/s/m$^2$). The variables $w$ and $\omega$ have the same sign convention of upward (positive $z$) for positive transport.

### Final Layered Equations

momentum:

$$
\frac{\partial {\bf u}_k}{\partial t}
+ q_k h_k {\bf u}_k^{\perp}
+ \frac{\omega_k^{top}}{\rho_k^{top}} {\bf u}_k^{top} - \frac{\omega_k^{bot}}{\rho_k^{bot}}{\bf u}_k^{bot}
=
- v_k \nabla_r p_k - \nabla_r \Phi_k
- \nabla_r K_k
+ {\bf D}_k^u + {\bf F}_k^u
$$ (layered-momentum)

mass:

$$
\frac{\partial h_k}{\partial t} + \nabla_r \cdot \left(h_k {\bf u}_k\right) + \omega_k^{top} - \omega_k^{bot}= Q^h_k
$$ (layered-mass)

tracers:

$$
\frac{\partial h_k \varphi_k}{\partial t} + \nabla_r \cdot \left(h_k {\bf u}_k \varphi_k\right)

> + \varphi_k^{top} \omega_k^{top} - \varphi_k^{bot}\omega_k^{bot}

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
+ \varphi_k \omega_k^{top} - \varphi_{k+1} \omega_{k+1}
```
To be consistent with equation 43

Author: done.

=  D^\varphi_k + Q^\varphi_k.
$$ (layered-tracer)

The superscripts $top$ and $bot$ mean that the layered variable is interpolated to the top and bottom layer interface, respectively. In [](layered-momentum) the non-divergent momentum advection and Coriolis term were combined and expressed in terms of the potential vorticity $q_k$,

$$
 \zeta_k {\bf u}_k^\perp + f {\bf u}_k^\perp = \frac{\zeta_k + f }{h_k}h_k{\bf u}_k^\perp \equiv q_k h_k {\bf u}^\perp_k.
$$ (potential-vort-adv)

Surface fluxes $Q^h_k$ have been added to the mass equation for precipitation, evaporation, and river runoff.  These fluxes, like mass transport $\omega$, are in units of kg/s/m$^2$.

## 5. Discrete Equations

The horizontally discretized layered equations are as follows. We have dropped the $r$ in $\nabla_r$ for conciseness, and the operator $\nabla$ from here on means within-layer.

$$
\frac{\partial u_{e,k}}{\partial t} + \left[ \frac{{\bf k} \cdot \nabla \times u_{e,k} +f_v}{[h_{i,k}]_v}\right]_e\left([h_{i,k}]_e u_{e,k}^{\perp}\right)
+ \left[ v_{i,k}^{top}\omega_{i,k}^{top} \right]_e u_{e,k}^{top} - \left[ v_{i,k+1}^{top}\omega_{i,k+1}^{top} \right]_e u_{e,k+1}^{top}
=

> - v_{i,k} \nabla p_{i,k} - \nabla \Phi_{i,k}

Reviewer 6: Since these two terms have their own design doc dedicated to them in #226, maybe we should just say $PGF_e/$ or something along those lines and say that it is defined elsewhere?

> - v_{i,k} \nabla p_{i,k} - \nabla \Phi_{i,k}

Reviewer 6: @sbrus89, how would you like to handle this?

> - v_{i,k} \nabla p_{i,k} - \nabla \Phi_{i,k}

Reviewer 6: In discussing this with @sbrus89, he thought it was just best to make sure the formulation here matches the centered version of the PGF that we're working on in #226.

> - v_{i,k} \nabla p_{i,k} - \nabla \Phi_{i,k}

Author: @hyungyukang is correct, the specific volume needs to be averaged to the edge. I changed that. I agree that we should just match the centered version of PGF in this document, which is what is presented here.

- \nabla K_{i,k} +  { \bf D}^u_{e,k} + {\bf F}^u_{e,k}
$$ (discrete-momentum)

$$
\frac{\partial h_{i,k}}{\partial t} + \nabla \cdot \left([h_{i,k}]_e u_{e,k}\right)
+ \omega_{i,k}^{top} - \omega_{i,k+1}^{top}
= Q^h_{i,k}
$$ (discrete-thickness)

$$
\frac{\partial h_{i,k} \varphi_{i,k}}{\partial t} + \nabla \cdot \left(u_{e,k} [h_{i,k} \varphi_{i,k}]_e \right)

> + \varphi_{i,k}^{top} \omega_{i,k}^{top} - \varphi_{i,k+1}^{top}\omega_{i,k+1}^{top}

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
+ \varphi_{i,k} \omega_{i,k}^{top} - \varphi_{i,k+1} \omega_{i,k+1}^{top}
```
Should we present @xylar and @alicebarthel's assumption that tracers are constant vertically within a layer before this equation?

Author: That assumption should be stated in the [layer integration section](https://portal.nersc.gov/project/e3sm/mpeterse/omega/design-doc-v1-eqns/_build/html/design/OmegaV1GoverningEqns.html#layer-integration). I will add that.

Reviewer 6: Let's talk about this at today's meeting.  Please don't edit yet.

   + \nabla_{3D} \Phi 
+ \rho {\bf D}^u + \rho {\bf F}^u
$$ (continuous-momentum)

mass:

$$
\frac{D \rho}{D t} \equiv
\frac{\partial \rho }{\partial t}
 + \nabla_{3D} \cdot \left( \rho  {\bf u}_{3D}  \right)
= 0
$$ (continuous-mass)

tracers:

$$
\frac{D \rho \varphi }{D t} \equiv
\frac{\partial \rho \varphi}{\partial t}
 + \nabla_{3D} \cdot \left( \rho \varphi {\bf u}_{3D}  \right)
= D^\varphi + Q^\varphi
$$ (continuous-tracer)

Here we have express the following terms as a general operators, with examples of specific forms provided below: the dissipation ${\bf D}^u$, momentum forcing ${\bf F}^u$, tracer diffusion $D^\varphi$, and tracer sources and sinks $Q^\varphi$. The graviational potential, $\Phi$, is written in a general form, and may include Earth's gravity, tidal forces, and self attraction and loading. The momentum equation can be rewritten using the product rule on $\rho {\bf u}$, mass conservation, and dividing by $\rho$, as:

$$
\frac{D {\bf u}_{3D} }{D t} \equiv
\frac{\partial {\bf u}_{3D}}{\partial t}
+ {\bf u}_{3D}\cdot \nabla_{3D} {\bf u}_{3D}
  = - \frac{1}{\rho} \nabla_{3D} p
   + \nabla_{3D} \Phi 
+ {\bf D}^u + {\bf F}^u
$$ (continuous-momentum-rho)

> Geophysical fluids such as the ocean and atmosphere are rotating and stratified, and horizontal velocities are orders of magnitude larger than vertical velocities. It is therefore convenient to separate the horizontal and vertical as ${\bf u}_{3D} = \left( {\bf u}, w \right)$ and $\nabla_{3D} = \left( \nabla_z, d/dz \right)$ where $z$ is the vertical direction in a local coordinate frame on the Earth's surface and $w$ is the vertical velocity. The $z$ subscript on $\nabla_z$ is to remind us that this is the true horizontal gradient (perpendicular to $z$), as opposed to gradients within tilted layers used in the following section. The Earth's gravitational force is included as $\Phi_{gravity} = -gz $ so that $ \nabla_{3D} \Phi_{gravity} =  -g{\bf k}$. The rotating frame of reference results in the Coriolis force $f {\bf k} \times {\bf u} \equiv f {\bf u}^\perp$, where $f$ is the Coriolis parameter and ${\bf u}^\perp$ is the horizontal velocity rotated $90^o$ from $\bf u$. See any textbook in the [References](#references) for a full derivation.

Reviewer 6: Let's maybe think of another term for $\Phi_{gravity}$, maybe $\Phi_{g}$.

$$
\frac{\partial }{\partial x'} \left[ \varphi(x(x'),y(y'),z(x',y',r,t),t) \right]
= \frac{\partial \varphi}{\partial x}\frac{\partial x}{\partial x'} +  \frac{\partial \varphi}{\partial z} \frac{\partial z}{\partial x'}
$$ (dvarphidx)

We may define the tilted horizontal variable $x'$ as we please. The simplest definition is $x'(x)\equiv x$. Then $\partial x / \partial x'=1$. Rearranging [](#dvarphidx) and repeating for $y$,

$$
\begin{aligned}
\frac{\partial \varphi}{\partial x} &=
\frac{\partial \varphi}{\partial x'}
- \frac{\partial \varphi}{\partial z} \frac{\partial z}{\partial x'}\\
\frac{\partial \varphi}{\partial y} &=
\frac{\partial \varphi}{\partial y'}
- \frac{\partial \varphi}{\partial z} \frac{\partial z}{\partial y'}.
\end{aligned}
$$ (dvarphidxy)

This may be written in vector form as

$$
\nabla_z \varphi = \nabla_r \varphi - \frac{\partial \varphi}{\partial z} \nabla_r z.
$$ (dvarphidnabla)

> ### Pressure Gradient

Reviewer 6: I would lean toward leaving out this section entirely.  The balance between the pressure-gradient and gravity terms is fraught enough to be the subject of entire papers and there's a reason we have this in its own design document (which is evolving).  In particular, I don't think I agree with the reasoning behind equation (35) below.

Author: I think this section is clear now. You can see the [compiled version here](https://portal.nersc.gov/project/e3sm/mpeterse/omega/design-doc-v1-eqns/_build/html/design/OmegaV1GoverningEqns.html#pressure-gradient). Once I defined the geopotential and substitute everything in, the steps to the final $-v  \nabla_r p - \nabla_r \Phi$ is straightforward.

Reviewer 6: Okay, I think I agree.  Let's discuss it in a few minutes (if we get this far).  I thought the substitution wasn't necessary because the equation already has a geopotential term but I think I see how that term cancels out.

 + \nabla_z \cdot \left( \rho \varphi {\bf u}  \right)
 + \frac{\partial}{\partial z} \left(  \rho \varphi w \right)
= D^\varphi + Q^\varphi
$$ (continuous-tracer-final)

equation of state:

$$
\rho = f_{eos}(p,\Theta,S).
$$ (continuous-eos-final)

hydrostatic pressure:

$$
p(x,y,z) = p^{surf}(x,y) + \int_{z}^{z^{surf}} \rho g dz'.
$$ (continuous-hydrostatic-pressure-final)

Here the $\nabla_z$ operators are exactly horizontal; we expand terms for tilted layers in the following section. The momentum diffusion terms include Laplacian (del2), biharmonic (del4), and vertical viscosity,

$$
{\bf D}^u
= \nu_2 \nabla_z^2 {\bf u} - \nu_4 \nabla_z^4 {\bf u}
 + \frac{\partial }{\partial z} \left( \nu_v \frac{\partial {\bf u}}{\partial z} \right)
$$ (continuous-h_mom_diff)
and may also include a Rayleigh drag and eventually parameterizations. Momentum forcing is due to wind stress and bottom drag. Similarly, the tracer diffusion terms include Laplacian (del2), and vertical viscosity,

$$
D^\varphi =
 \nabla_z\cdot\left(\rho \kappa_2 \nabla_z\varphi \right)
+ \rho \frac{\partial }{\partial z}
  \left( \kappa_v \frac{\partial \varphi}{\partial z} \right),
$$ (continuous-v_tr_diff)

> and may also include a biharmonic (del4) term and parameterizations such as Redi mixing. Sources and sinks include surface fluxes from the atmosphere and land, and bio-geo-chemical reactions.

Reviewer: @mark-petersen I don't believe these equations have been reynolds averaged at this stage.  As such, I don't think it's appropriate to have all these parameterization of reynolds stresses and turbulent fluxes in the diffusion terms.  Perhaps the original equations from Kundu or Mom5 manual are already averaged?  If so we should say so.  Otherwise only molecular diffusion/viscosity should be here in these terms in my view.

+  \int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}} \frac{\partial }{\partial z} \left(  \rho w{\bf u} \right) dz
+  \int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}} 
 f \rho {\bf u}^\perp dz
  =  \int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}}  \left[- \nabla_z p 
  - \rho \nabla_z \Phi 
+ \rho {\bf D}^u + \rho {\bf F}^u \right] dz
$$ (z-integration-momentum)

$$
\frac{\partial }{\partial t}  \int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}} \rho dz
 +\nabla_z \cdot \left( \int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}} \rho  {\bf u} dz \right)
 + \int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}}\frac{\partial}{\partial z} \left(  \rho  w \right) dz
= 0
$$ (z-integration-mass)

$$
\frac{\partial }{\partial t} \int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}} \rho \varphi  dz
 + \nabla_z \cdot \left( \int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}} \rho \varphi {\bf u} dz  \right)
 + \int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}} \frac{\partial}{\partial z} \left(  \rho \varphi w \right) dz
= \int_{z_k^{bot}}^{z_k^{top}} \left( D^\varphi + Q^\varphi \right) dz
$$ (z-integration-tracers)
 
This results in conservation equations that are valid over the layer. The momentum variables are simply vertically averaged. Tracer variables are vertically mass-averaged, as defined in [](def-mass-thickness-average).

> In order to deal with nonlinear terms where we take the integrals of products, we may assume that the variables are piecewise constant in the vertical within each layer, i.e.

Reviewer 6: This approach works for some terms but not others.  For example, if you assume that velocity is constant in the vertical, you will not get the expected $w \partial \mathbf{u} / \partial z$ term in the velocity equation and you will not get agreement on what the boundary condition is between layers in the momentum equation (where all terms are still multiplied by $h_k$): one layer thinks $u_k$ should be involved, while the one above thinks $u_{k-1}$ should be there.

$$
a(x,y,z,t) = a_k(x,y,t) \in [z_k^{bot}, z_k^{top}).
$$ (discrete-a)

> Then variables may come out of the integral as needed. For example,

Reviewer 6: I continue to think all integrals really *must* be in $p$ space (weighted by $\rho$), rather than in $z$.
